[2026] 1 S.C.R. 30 : 2026 INSC 6
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.
v.
Airports Authority of India
(Civil Appeal No(s). 37-38 of 2026)
05 January 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala* and K.V. Viswanathan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
i) Whether the sole arbitrator could be said to have become 
“ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator” by virtue of sub-section 
(5) of s.12 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; ii) whether 
the parties could be said to have waived the applicability of 
sub-section (5) of s.12 of the Act, 1996, by way of their conduct, 
either expressed or implied; iii) whether the appellants could have 
raised an objection to the appointment of the sole arbitrator for the 
first time in an application u/s.34 of the Act, 1996.
Headnotes†
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.12 and s.18 – Position 
of law as regards s.12 of the Act, 1996 – Application of principle 
of equal treatment of parties provided in s.18:
Held: The principle of equal treatment of parties provided in s.18 of 
the Act, 1996, applies not only to the arbitral proceedings but also 
to the procedure for appointment of arbitrators – Equal treatment 
of the parties entails that the parties must have an equal say in 
the constitution of the arbitral tribunal. [Para 123(i)]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Sub-section (5) of s.12 
and Seventh Schedule – When relationship falls within any of 
the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule:
Held: Sub-section (5) of s.12 provides that any person whose 
relationship with the parties or counsel, or the dispute, whether 
direct or indirect, falls within any of the categories specified in 
the Seventh Schedule would be ineligible to be appointed as an 
arbitrator – Since, the ineligibility stems from the operation of law, 
not only is a person having an interest in the dispute or its outcome 
* Author

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
31
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
ineligible to act as an arbitrator, but appointment by such a person 
would be ex facie invalid. [Para 123(ii)]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Proviso to s.12(5) – 
The words “an express agreement in writing” in the proviso 
to s.12(5):
Held: The words “an express agreement in writing” in the proviso 
to s.12(5) means that the right to object to the appointment of an 
ineligible arbitrator cannot be taken away by mere implication – The 
agreement referred to in the proviso must be a clear, unequivocal 
written agreement. [Para 123(iii)]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.12(5) – When an 
arbitrator is found to be ineligible by virtue of s.12(5) r/w. the 
Seventh Schedule:
Held: When an arbitrator is found to be ineligible by virtue of 
s.12(5) r/w. the Seventh Schedule, his mandate is automatically 
terminated – In such circumstance, an aggrieved party may 
approach the court u/s. 14 r/w. s.15 for appointment of a substitute 
arbitrator – Whereas, when an award has been passed by such 
an arbitrator, an aggrieved party may approach the court u/s. 34 
for setting aside the award. [Para 123(iv)]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.12 – Parties vest 
jurisdiction in the tribunal:
Held: In arbitration, the parties vest jurisdiction in the tribunal 
by exercising their consent in furtherance of a valid arbitration 
agreement – An arbitrator who lacks jurisdiction cannot make an 
award on the merits – Hence, an objection to the inherent lack of 
jurisdiction can be taken at any stage of the proceedings. [Para 
123(v)]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – sub-section (5) of s.12 
and Seventh Schedule – Objective of s.12:
Held: There is a conspectus of decisions of this Court which 
lay down that, s.12 was amended with the objective of ensuring 
independence and impartiality of arbitrators – By virtue of sub-
section (5) of s.12, any person whose relationship with the parties 
or counsel, or the dispute, whether direct or indirect, falls within any 

32
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule is rendered 
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. [Para 51]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – sub-section (5) of 
s.12 – When an arbitration agreement is in violation of sub-
section (5) of s.12:
Held: When an arbitration agreement is in violation of sub-section 
(5) of s.12 of the Act, 1996, the parties can neither insist on 
appointment of an arbitrator in terms of the agreement nor would 
any appointment so made be valid in the eyes of law. [Para 57]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Unilateral appointments:
Held: Unilateral appointments are not consistent with the basic 
tenet of arbitration, i.e., mutual confidence in the arbitrator – It 
would not be unreasonable for a party to apprehend that an 
arbitrator unilaterally appointed by the opposite party may not act 
with complete impartiality. [Para 58]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.12(5) – s.12(5) and 
unilateral appointment of an arbitrator:
Held: It is apposite to understand that s.12(5) does not prohibit 
unilateral appointment of an arbitrator – It provides that whenever 
an appointment of an arbitrator is hit by the bar u/s.12(5), the 
arbitrator would be ineligible to act, irrespective of whether the 
appointment was unilateral or with consent of both parties – In 
such circumstances, the parties may, in the manner provided under 
the proviso, waive the ineligibility. [Para 60]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.12(5) – Unilateral 
appointment of a sole arbitrator is void ab initio:
Held: The unilateral appointment of a sole arbitrator is void ab 
initio, and the sole arbitrator so appointed is de jure ineligible to 
act as an arbitrator in terms of s.12(5) r/w. the Seventh Schedule 
of the Act, 1996. [Para 68]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.21 – Clarification 
regarding notice u/s.21of the Act, 1996:
Held: A notice u/s.21 of the Act, 1996, is an expression to set the 
arbitration agreement into motion upon arising of disputes between 
the parties – The section states that the date of commencement of 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
33
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
arbitration would be the date on which the recipient receives the 
notice from the claimant that the dispute be referred to arbitration – 
The notice acts as a communication that the sender is aggrieved 
and seeks to invoke the arbitration agreement – It does not, by 
itself, operate as consent to any appointment to be made in the 
future. [Para 70]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Proviso to s.12 (5) – 
Essentials of the proviso to s.12(5):
Held: i) The parties can waive their right to object under sub-
section (5) of s.12; ii) The right to object under the sub-section can 
be waived only subsequent to a dispute having arisen between the 
parties; iii) The waiver must be in the form of an express agreement 
in writing – The proviso to sub-section (5) of s.12 stipulates that 
parties, after disputes have arisen, must expressly agree in 
writing to waive the ineligibility of the proposed arbitrator – This 
impliedly means that the parties are waiving their right to object 
to the arbitrator’s ineligibility in terms of s.12(5) of the Act, 1996. 
[Paras 75, 76]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – sub-section (5) of 
s.12 – An express agreement in writing, waiving the bar under 
sub-section (5) of s.12:
Held: It is only through an express agreement in writing, 
waiving the bar under sub-section (5) of s.12, that the other 
party can be said to have voluntarily consented to the unilateral 
appointment of such an arbitrator – The proviso conveys that the 
arbitrator, although ineligible to be appointed, yet can continue to 
perform his functions, as it is oriented towards facilitating party 
autonomy – Thus, the proviso reinforces party autonomy and 
equal treatment of parties in arbitration – In other words, even 
though the appointment had been made by one of the parties, 
by the act of entering into an agreement in writing, the other 
party expresses its consent – The manner of the agreement 
prescribed by the statute demonstrates voluntariness by the 
parties – The ineligibility of an arbitrator can be waived only by 
an express agreement in writing – In the present case, there is 
no agreement in writing, after the disputes arose, waiving the 
ineligibility of the sole arbitrator or the right to object u/s.12(5) 
of the Act, 1996. [Paras 81, 82, 89]

34
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – sub-section (5) of 
s.12, s.21, s.33 – What cannot be countenanced to mean 
“an express agreement in writing” within the meaning of the 
proviso to sub-section (5) of s.12 of the Act, 1996:
Held: A notice invoking the arbitration clause u/s.21 of the Act, 
1996, a procedural order, submission of statement of claim by the 
appellants, the filing an application seeking interim relief, or a reply 
to an application u/s.33 of the Act, 1996, cannot be countenanced 
to mean “an express agreement in writing” within the meaning of 
the proviso to sub-section (5) of s.12 of the Act, 1996. [Para 96]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.12(5), s.14 – Where 
a party is aggrieved by the ineligibility of an arbitrator:
Held: Where a party is aggrieved by the ineligibility of an arbitrator 
u/s.12(5), it may directly approach the court u/s.14 of the Act, 
1996 – There is no doubt that when an arbitrator is ineligible u/s. 
12(5), i.e., he lacks inherent jurisdiction to hold the position, his 
mandate stands automatically terminated, and it is not necessary 
for the parties to challenge his appointment u/s.12 r/w. s.13 – 
When such a challenge is made, the court is required to determine 
whether the arbitrator suffers from de jure inability u/s.14(1)(a) of 
the Act, 1996. [Para 102] 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.14 and s.15(2) – 
Terminating mandate of arbitrator and substituting arbitrator:
Held: An application u/s. 14 is made for the purpose of terminating the 
mandate of the arbitrator, and, consequently, a substitute arbitrator 
is appointed in terms of s.15(2) – As regards where the mandate 
of the arbitrator has been terminated with the consent of both the 
parties u/s. 15(1)(b), it is not required for the parties to approach 
the court to seek termination of the mandate of the arbitrator, 
because it has been terminated by the parties themselves – The 
substitution of the arbitrator is sought because the termination of 
mandate of the arbitrator does not result in the termination of arbitral 
proceedings – The proceedings remain intact, only the composition 
of the arbitral tribunal changes. [Paras 103, 104]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.34 – Challenge to 
the ineligibility of the arbitrator after arbitral award has been 
passed:

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
35
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
Held: When an award has been passed, the proceedings before the 
arbitral tribunal conclude, leaving no possibility of substituting the 
arbitrator at this stage – In other words, once an award is passed, 
the mandate of the arbitral tribunal also arrives at a conclusion – In 
such circumstances, a party aggrieved by the arbitrator’s ineligibility 
may challenge the award by filing an application u/s.34 of the 1996 
Act, as an award passed by an ineligible arbitrator is nullity, non-est, 
or void ab initio, and against the public policy of India. [Para 109]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Challenge to the 
ineligibility of the arbitrator at any stage of the proceedings:
Held: A challenge to an arbitrator’s ineligibility could be raised at 
any stage because an award passed in such circumstance is non-
est, i.e., it carries no enforceability or recognition in law. [Para 113]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.12(5) – Obligation 
upon the arbitrator:
Held: An arbitrator is better equipped with the position of law 
on appointments, more particularly, unilateral appointments – 
Therefore, it becomes incumbent upon the arbitrator that upon 
entering reference and at the very first hearing, to ensure from 
the parties that they are willing to participate in the proceedings 
and to insist upon a written agreement waiving the requirement 
of s.12(5) of the Act, 1996. [Para 121]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – When party does not 
appear despite receipt of notice:
Held: If any party does not appear despite receipt of notice, the 
arbitrator shall not proceed further and shall immediately withdraw 
from the arbitral proceedings – The arbitrator must, along with the 
waiver agreement, record the minutes even when the parties are 
cooperating – This would certainly save time and avoid multiplicity 
of proceedings. [Para 122]
Case Law Cited
Dharma Prathishthanam v. Madhok Construction (P) Ltd. [2004] 
Supp. 5 SCR 866 : (2005) 9 SCC 686; TRF Ltd. v. Energo 
Engineering Projects Ltd. [2017] 7 SCR 409 : (2017) 8 SCC 377; 
Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. v. United Telecoms Ltd. [2019] 6 
SCR 97 : (2019) 5 SCC 755; Perkins Eastman Architects DPC 

36
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
& Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd. [2019] 17 SCR 275 : (2020) 20 SCC 
760; Lombardi Engg. Ltd. v. Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd. 
[2023] 12 SCR 943 : (2024) 4 SCC 341; Central Organization for 
Railway Electrification v. ECI SPIR SMO MCML (JV) A Joint Venture 
Company [2024] 11 SCR 2173 : (2025) 4 SCC 641 (CORE II); 
HRD Corpn v. GAIL (India) Ltd. [2017] 11 SCR 857 : (2018) 12 
SCC 471 – relied on.
Lion Engineering Consultants v. State of Madhya Pradesh [2018] 
6 SCR 683 : (2018) 16 SCC 758; Hindustan Zinc Ltd. v. Ajmer 
Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd. [2019] 15 SCR 113 : (2019) 17 SCC 82; 
Board of Control for Cricket in India v. Kochi Cricket Pvt. Ltd. & 
Ors. [2018] 2 SCR 829 : (2018) 6 SCC 287; State of Punjab v. 
Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar [2011] 15 SCR 540 : (2011) 14 SCC 
770; Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. v. Bihar Rajya Pul Nirman 
Nigam Ltd., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2578; Chennai Metro Rail 
Ltd. v. Transtonnelstroy Afcons (JV) [2023] 14 SCR 995 : (2024) 
6 SCC 211; Hira Lal Patni v. Kali Nath [1962] 2 SCR 747 : 1961 
SCC OnLine SC 42; Hindustan Zinc Ltd. v. Ajmer Vidyut Vitran 
Nigam Ltd. [2019] 15 SCR 113 : (2019) 17 SCC 82 – referred to.
Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. v. Narendra Kumar Prajapat, 2023 SCC 
OnLine Del 3148; McLeod Russel India Ltd. & Ors. v. Aditya Birla 
Finance Ltd. & Ors., 2023 SCC OnLine Cal 330; Anuj Kumar v. 
Franchise India Brands Ltd., 2023 SCC OnLine Del 2560; Lite 
Bite Foods Pvt. Ltd. v. AAI, 2019 SCC OnLine Bom 5163; Clarke 
Energy India Pvt. Ltd. v. SAS EPC Solution Pvt. Ltd. & Anr., 2021 
SCC OnLine Mad 6121; Man Industries (India) Ltd. v. Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd., 2023 SCC OnLine Del 3537; Govind Singh v. 
Satya Group Pvt. Ltd., 2023 SCC OnLine Del 37; Alpro Industries v. 
Ambience (P) Ltd., 2025 SCC OnLine Del 8373; Bhim Bahadur v. 
Vikram Singh, 2015 SCC OnLine Utt 1563 – referred to.
List of Acts
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
List of Keywords
Section 12(5) of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Seventh 
Schedule of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Proviso to 
Section 12(5) of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Section 14 of 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Section 34 of Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996; Unilateral Appointment; De Jure Ineligibility; 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
37
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
Doctrine of Inherent Lack of Jurisdiction; Waiver; Equal Treatment 
of Parties; Neutrality; Impartiality; Arbitrator; Notice; Agreement in 
writing; Arbitration agreement; Sole arbitrator; Arbitral Tribunal.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 37-38 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.02.2025 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in FAO(OS) (COMM) Nos. 23 and 24 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Navin Pahwa, Ashish Mohan, Sr. Advs., Akshit Mago, Akshit 
Pradhan.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Parag Tripathi, Sr. Adv., Sonal K Singh, Ayan De, Shivang Singh, 
Anmol Adhrit, Ms. Sukanya Lal.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the 
following parts:-
INDEX*
I.
FACTUAL MATRIX .......................................................................
3
II.
JUDGMENT OF THE SINGLE JUDGE ON APPLICATION UNDER 
SECTION 34 OF THE ACT, 1996 ................................................
8
III.
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT ..............................................................
9
IV.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS ............... 11
V.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT .............. 14
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.

38
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
VI.
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION ................................................. 16
VII.
ANALYSIS .................................................................................... 17
i.	
Whether the sole arbitrator could be said to have become 
“ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator” by virtue of 
sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act, 1996? ............... 17
a.	 Interplay between Equal Treatment of Parties and Party 
Autonomy ......................................................................... 17
b.	 Scope and Application of sub-section (5) of Section 12 of 
the Act, 1996 ..................................................................
21
c.	
Appointment of the sole arbitrator in light of sub-section 
(5) of Section 12 of the Act, 1996 ................................... 26
d.	 De Jure inability of the arbitrator to perform his functions 35
ii.	 Whether the parties could be said to have waived the 
applicability of sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the 
Act, 1996, by way of their conduct, either expressed or 
implied? ................................................................................. 40
a.	 Meaning and Import of the expression “express agreement 
in writing” used in proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 
12 of the Act, 1996 ........................................................... 41
b.	 “Statement of Claim” as a parameter of waiver .............. 49
c.	
“Extension of Time” under Section 29A of the Act, 1996 
as a parameter of waiver ................................................. 50
d.	 “Continued Participation” as a parameter of waiver ....... 52
iii.	 Whether the appellants could have raised an objection 
to the appointment of the sole arbitrator for the first time 
in an application under Section 34 of the Act, 1996? ....... 54
a.	 Challenge to the ineligibility of the arbitrator during the 
proceedings ...................................................................... 55
b.	 Challenge to the ineligibility of the arbitrator after arbitral 
award has been passed .................................................. 60
c.	
Challenge to the ineligibility of the arbitrator at any stage 
of the proceedings ........................................................... 64
VIII. CONCLUSION .............................................................................. 70

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
39
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
Since the issues raised in both the captioned appeals are the same, 
the parties are same, and the challenge is also to the self-same 
judgment and order passed by the High Court, those were taken up 
for hearing analogously and are being disposed of by this common 
judgment and order.
3.	
These appeals arise from the common judgment and order dated 
11.02.2025 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi in 
FAO(OS) (COMM) Nos. 23 and 24 of 2025 respectively (hereinafter, 
the “Impugned Judgment”), by which the appeals filed by the 
appellants herein under Section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 (for short, the “Act, 1996”) came to be dismissed thereby 
affirming the order dated 19.02.2022 passed by a learned Single 
Judge of the High Court in OMP (COMM) Nos. 414 and 415 of 
2018 respectively under Section 34 of the Act, 1996 (hereinafter, 
the “Single Judge”) dismissing the preliminary objection raised by 
the appellants as regards unilateral appointment of a sole arbitrator 
by the respondent. 
I.	
FACTUAL MATRIX 
4.	
The facts giving rise to the appeals may be summarized as under:- 
i.	
The appellant no. 1 and appellant no. 2, viz. Bhadra International 
(India) Pvt. Ltd., and Novia International Consulting Aps, 
respectively executed an agreement to form a joint consortium 
namely Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. and Novia 
International Consulting Aps, for the purposes of undertaking 
ground handling services at various airports in India. The 
consortium is the appellant no. 3 before us. 
ii.	
The respondent (Airports Authority of India) floated two tender 
notices inviting tenders for appointment of an agency for 
ground handling services at some airports. In response to 
these notices, the appellant no. 3 emerged as the successful 
bidder. Pursuant to the two notices, the parties executed two 
License Agreement dated 29.11.2010 (“License Agreement”). 
As per the License Agreement, the appellant no. 3 was 
permitted to provide ground handling services at the specified 
airports. 

40
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
iii.	
The aforesaid License Agreement, more particularly, Clause 78 
provided that in the event of any dispute or difference arising 
out of the said license agreement the same would have to be 
resolved through arbitration. The said clause read as under:-
“78. All disputes and differences, arising out of or, 
in any way, touching or concerning this Agreement, 
(except those the decision whereof is otherwise 
hereinbefore expressly provided for or to which the 
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) 
Act, 1971 and the rules framed hereunder which are 
now in force or which may hereafter come in to force, 
are applicable) shall be referred to the sole arbitration 
of a person, to be appointed by the Chairman of the 
Authority or, in case the designation of Chairman is 
changed or his office is abolished, by the person, for 
the time being entrusted, whether or not, in addition 
to other functions, with the functions of the Chairman, 
Airports Authority of India, by whatever designation 
such person may be called, and, if the Arbitrator, so 
appointed, is unable or unwilling to act, to the sole 
arbitrations or some other person to be similarly 
appointed. It will be no objection to such appointment 
that the Arbitrator so appointment is a servant of 
the Authority, that he had to deal with the matters to 
which this Agreement relates and that in the course 
of his duties, as such servant of the Authority, he 
had expressed views on all or any of the matters in 
dispute or differences. The award of the arbitrator, so 
appointment, shall be final and binding on the Parties. 
The Arbitrator may, with the consent of the parties, 
enlarge, from time to time, the time for making and 
publishing the award. The venue of the arbitration 
shall be at New Delhi.”
(Emphasis is ours)
iv.	
On 23.10.2015, the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) 
Act, 2015 came into effect (for short, “the Amendment Act, 
2015”), by which sub-section (5) was inserted into Section 12. 
The provision reads thus:-

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
41
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
“[(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the 
contrary, any person whose relationship, with the 
parties or counsel or the subject-matter of the dispute, 
falls under any of the categories specified in the 
Seventh Schedule shall be ineligible to be appointed 
as an arbitrator: 
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes 
having arisen between them, waive the applicability of 
this sub-section by an express agreement in writing.]”
v.	
Sometime, in the year 2015, various disputes cropped up 
between the appellants and the respondent herein. Accordingly, 
the appellants vide notice dated 27.11.2015 invoked the 
arbitration clause and requested the respondent to appoint 
an arbitrator in terms of Clause 78 of the aforesaid License 
Agreement. The relevant part of the notice reads thus:- 
“We also like to bring out most humbly that it is 
incumbent upon the Chairman AAI to appoint the 
Sole Arbitrator within a reasonable time, least we 
might not be left with no recourse, but to seek a relief 
under Section 11, Sub Section 6, Chapter III of the 
Arbitration & Reconciliation Act 1996.”
vi.	
On 22.03.2016, the sole arbitrator passed the first procedural 
order recording that none of the parties had any objection to 
his appointment. The procedural order reads thus:-
“PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 1
With
Minutes of, and the Directions made at, the 
hearing on 22.03.2016 at 1:00 pm
[AT D-247 (Basement), Defence Colony, New 
Delhi-110024]
This preliminary meeting of the Tribunal was 
held D-247 (Basement), Defence Colony, New 
Delhi-110024 on 22nd March, 2016 at 1:00 PM. None 
of the parties have any objection to my appointment 
as the Sole Arbitrator. I declare that I have no interest 

42
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in any of the Parties, or in the disputes referred to 
the Sole Arbitrator.[…]” 
(Emphasis supplied)
vii.	 At the joint request of the parties, two applications were filed 
under Section 29A of the Act, 1966, seeking extension of time 
for the completion of the proceedings. On both the occasions, 
the applications were allowed by the High Court. 
viii.	 Ultimately, the sole arbitrator passed the arbitral awards dated 
30.07.2018 whereby the claims and counter-claims of the 
respective parties were rejected. In effect, the arbitrator passed 
a ‘Nil’ award. 
ix.	
Aggrieved by the dismissal of its claim, the appellants challenged 
the award by filing applications under Section 34 of the Act, 
1996, bearing O.M.P. (COMM) Nos. 414 and 415 of 2018 
respectively, before the Single Judge of the High Court. 
x.	
Thereafter, by way of applications bearing I.A. Nos. 1834 and 
1842 of 2022 respectively, the appellants sought to amend the 
aforesaid applications to contend that since the arbitrator was 
appointed unilaterally, the award was liable to be set aside 
(“Amendment Application”). 
xi.	
The aforesaid applications filed by the appellants came to be 
rejected by the Single Judge vide order dated 24.12.2024. 
xii.	 Being aggrieved by the aforesaid, the appellants preferred 
appeals under Section 37 of the Act, 1996, bearing FAO(OS) 
(COMM) Nos. 23 and 24 of 2025 respectively, seeking to 
challenge the judgment and order passed by a learned Single 
Judge. The said appeals came to be dismissed vide the 
impugned judgment. 
xiii.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the appellants are 
here before this Court with the present appeals. 
II.	
JUDGMENT OF THE SINGLE JUDGE ON APPLICATION 
UNDER SECTION 34 OF THE ACT, 1996 
5.	
Aggrieved by the awards passed by the sole arbitrator, the appellants 
filed applications under Section 34 of the Act, 1996, raising the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
43
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
preliminary objection that since the appointment of the sole arbitrator 
was made unilaterally by the respondent, the award was liable to 
be set aside. 
6.	
The learned Single Judge held that the appointment of the arbitrator 
was in accordance with the procedure agreed upon by the parties 
under Clause 78 of the License Agreement. Consequently, it rejected 
the challenge to the appointment of the sole arbitrator on the following 
grounds:- 
i.	
First, it observed that the sole arbitrator appointed by the 
respondent did not suffer from any disqualification under the 
Fifth or Seventh Schedule read with Section 12(5) of the Act, 
1996. The parties themselves had agreed to the procedure 
of appointment. Moreover, the appellants did not raise any 
objection regarding the independence and impartiality of the 
arbitrator. Accordingly, the appointment of the arbitrator could 
not have been belatedly called into question. 
ii.	
Secondly, on the issue of waiver, the learned Single Judge 
observed that the proviso to Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996, 
stipulates the requirement of clear and positive manifestation 
of waiver in writing. It observed that mere participation in the 
arbitral proceedings without raising any objection would not 
constitute an express waiver in writing as per the requirement 
of the proviso. However, it arrived at the conclusion that the 
first procedural order passed by the sole arbitrator explicitly 
recorded that parties had no objection to his appointment. 
iii.	
Thus, according to the learned Single Judge, the appellants 
could be said to have waived the applicability of Section 12(5) 
by not raising an objection before the sole arbitrator in the first 
procedural order. 
III.	
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
7.	
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order passed by the 
learned Single Judge dismissing the preliminary objection in so far 
as the appointment of the sole arbitrator, the appellants preferred 
appeals under Section 37 of the Act, 1996. 
8.	
The High Court, in its impugned judgment, held that the appointment of 
the sole arbitrator was not unilateral, as the respondent had proceeded 

44
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to appoint arbitrator only pursuant to the written request made by 
the appellants. Therefore, it could not be said that the appellants 
had not consented to the appointment. The High Court further noted 
that the sole arbitrator had expressly obtained the consent of the 
parties, and at no point of time the appellants asserted that their 
consent was incorrectly recorded or that they had not consented. 
9.	
The High Court observed that the appellants continued to participate 
in the arbitral proceedings without raising any objection. It also 
observed that the challenge to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator was 
not raised in the first instance but rather made belatedly through the 
Amendment Application. 
10.	 The appellants had argued before the High Court that prior to the 
insertion of sub-section (5) they had no occasion to challenge the 
appointment of the sole arbitrator. Such a challenge, according to 
them, could have been raised only after the introduction of sub-
section (5) of Section 12. However, the High Court held that it was 
immaterial as to when the amendment was introduced. The High 
Court took the view that, the appellants by their conduct could be 
said to have submitted to the jurisdiction of the sole arbitrator. 
11.	 In the aforesaid context, the High Court observed the fact that the 
appellants had called upon the respondent to appoint an arbitrator, the 
sole arbitrator was accordingly appointed, and having unequivocally 
consented to the arbitral proceedings had no bearing on the insertion 
of the provision through an amendment. It was further observed that 
even after the introduction of sub-section (5), the arbitral proceedings 
continued for more than two years, still the appellants did not, at 
any stage, raise an objection. 
12.	 Lastly, the High Court observed that the case of the appellants cannot 
be equated with cases in which an objection to the appointment of 
the arbitrator have been raised throughout the proceedings, or at 
every stage. 
IV.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS 
13.	 Mr. Navin Pahwa, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
appellants would argue that the sole arbitrator was ineligible to act 
as an arbitrator as he was unilaterally appointed by the Chairman of 
the respondent. Such an appointment was void ab initio and non-est 
in law, and therefore, the arbitral awards would be a nullity. He relied 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
45
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
on the decision of this Court in Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. v. 
United Telecoms Ltd., reported in (2019) 5 SCC 755, to submit 
that an appointment made by an ineligible person is void ab initio. 
14.	 In the same breath, Mr. Pahwa submitted that since the appointment 
of the arbitrator was void, the proceedings conducted pursuant to 
such appointment would also be a nullity. As a result, the awards 
passed by the sole arbitrator would also be contrary to the public 
policy of India, and thus, liable to be set aside. 
15.	 He further submitted that where the right to appoint a sole arbitrator 
rests solely with one party, that party’s choice would inevitably carry 
an element of exclusivity in determining the course of the arbitration. 
To fortify his submission, he relied on the decision of this Court in 
TRF Ltd. v. Energo Engineering Projects Ltd., reported in (2017) 
8 SCC 377. He submitted that a Managing Director, ineligible to act 
as an arbitrator under Section 12(5) read with Seventh Schedule of 
the Act, 1996, could not have appointed an arbitrator or nominate 
any other person to be an arbitrator. 
16.	 He highlighted that this Court has affirmed the decision in TRF (supra) 
in Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Ltd., 
reported in (2020) 20 SCC 760. In the present case, the Chairman of 
the respondent was ineligible to act as an arbitrator by virtue of Items 
1, 5, and 12 of the Seventh Schedule respectively. Consequently, 
any arbitrator appointed by such an ineligible person would be, by 
operation of law, equally ineligible to act as an arbitrator. 
17.	 It was further submitted that an objection to the unilateral appointment 
may be raised at any stage, including for the first time in Section 34 
proceedings. He added that the appellants by participating in the 
proceedings did not waive their right to raise an objection in terms of 
the proviso to Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996. To fortify his submission, 
he relied on the decision in Lion Engineering Consultants v. State 
of Madhya Pradesh, reported in (2018) 16 SCC 758, Hindustan 
Zinc Ltd. v. Ajmer Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd., reported in (2019) 17 
SCC 82, Kotak Mahindra Bank Ltd. v. Narendra Kumar Prajapat, 
reported in 2023 SCC OnLine Del 3148 respectively.
18.	 Mr. Pahwa further submitted that the proviso to Section 12(5) makes 
it limpid that ineligibility of an arbitrator could only be waived by 
an “express agreement in writing” between the parties, and such 
an agreement must be entered into after disputes have arisen. To 

46
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
make good his case, Mr. Pahwa placed reliance on the decisions of 
this Court in Bharat Broadband (supra) and Central Organization 
for Railway Electrification v. ECI SPIR SMO MCML (JV) A Joint 
Venture Company, reported in (2025) 4 SCC 641 (“CORE II”). 
19.	 He would submit that the law requires a conscious waiver, reduced 
into writing and signed by both parties. In this regard, he submitted 
that mere participation in proceedings, filing of statement of claim, 
silence, or not objecting to the appointment is insufficient to constitute 
a waiver. In the present case, the notice of invocation of arbitration, 
or not objecting in the first procedural order, or participating in the 
proceedings, or filing application under Sections 17 or 29A respectively 
would not amount to an “express agreement in writing”. 
20.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the appellants-claimants would submit that there being 
merit in his appeals, the same may be allowed and the impugned 
judgment passed by the High Court may be set aside. 
V.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT 
21.	 Mr. Parag Tripathi, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
respondent would submit that no error, not to speak of any error 
of law, could be said to have been committed by the High Court in 
passing the impugned judgment.
22.	 Mr. Tripathi submitted that the limited question that falls for the 
consideration of this Court is whether the present case falls within 
the proviso to Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996. In other words, whether 
there was a waiver by an “express agreement in writing”. 
23.	 He submitted that the first procedural order recording the consent of 
the appellants would constitute an “express agreement in writing” as 
per the proviso as it was subsequent to the dispute arising between 
the parties. Mr. Tripathi emphasized that the provision does not 
provide a format for an “express agreement”. He added that in so 
far as proposal or acceptance of any promise is made in words, the 
promise is said to be express. To make good this submission, he 
relied on the decision in the case of Bharat Broadband (supra). 
24.	 It was further submitted that no objection/consent of the appellants 
recorded in the first procedural order acts as an acknowledgment in 
writing with respect to the qualifications as well as the appointment 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
47
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
of the sole arbitrator. The appellants had also filed their statement of 
claim before the sole arbitrator. This is suggestive of the fact that the 
appellants in explicit terms had submitted to the jurisdiction of the sole 
arbitrator, and agreed to get the dispute resolved by the sole arbitrator. 
25.	 Mr. Tripathi relied on McLeod Russel India Ltd. & Ors. v. Aditya 
Birla Finance Ltd. & Ors., reported in 2023 SCC OnLine Cal 330, 
and Anuj Kumar v. Franchise India Brands Ltd., reported in 2023 
SCC OnLine Del 2560, to submit that the contents of pleadings or 
communication constitute an express agreement in writing, and the 
decision in Anuj Kumar (supra) is not in conflict with the decision 
of this Court in Bharat Broadband (supra). 
26.	 Mr. Tripathi further submitted that although sub-section (5) of Section 
12 read with Seventh Schedule of the Act, 1996 was introduced 
during the pendency of the arbitral proceedings, yet the appellants 
chose not to raise an objection to the appointment of the sole 
arbitrator. Accordingly, he submitted that the appellants did not 
raise any objection as to the constitution, appointment, jurisdiction, 
independence or impartiality of the sole arbitrator under Sections 13, 
14, or 16 of the Act, 1996, respectively throughout the proceedings. 
27.	 He added that the appellants raised the objection to the appointment 
of the sole arbitration only by way of an amendment to the Section 
34 application. The appellants did so as an afterthought, more than 
three years after filing the said application. 
28.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the learned Senior Counsel 
prayed that there being no merit in the appeals, the same may be 
dismissed. 
VI.	 ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION 
29.	 Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the materials on record, the following questions 
fall for our consideration:- 
i.	
Whether the sole arbitrator could be said to have become 
“ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator” by virtue of sub-
section (5) of Section 12 of the Act, 1996? 
ii.	
Whether the parties could be said to have waived the applicability 
of sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act, 1996, by way of 
their conduct, either expressed or implied? 

48
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
iii.	
Whether the appellants could have raised an objection to 
the appointment of the sole arbitrator for the first time in an 
application under Section 34 of the Act, 1996?
VII.	 ANALYSIS 
i.	
Whether the sole arbitrator could be said to have become 
“ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator” by virtue of 
sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act, 1996? 
30.	 It was submitted on behalf of the appellants herein that the sole 
arbitrator appointed by the Chairman of the respondent was ineligible 
to act as an arbitrator as he was appointed unilaterally. Further, such 
an appointment was void ab initio and non-est in law. 
31.	 On the aforesaid issue, the High Court, in its impugned judgment, 
held that the appointment of the sole arbitrator was not unilateral, 
as the respondents had proceeded to appoint the arbitrator only 
pursuant to the written request of the appellants. Therefore, the 
notice invoking arbitration operated as the appellants’ consent to 
the appointment of the arbitrator.
a.	
Interplay between Equal Treatment of Parties and Party 
Autonomy
32.	 In order to address this issue, we shall first look into Section 18 of 
the Act, 1996. It reads thus:- 
“18. Equal treatment of parties.—The parties shall be 
treated with equality and each party shall be given a full 
opportunity to present this case.”
33.	 Section 18 outlines two principles: first, equal treatment of parties; 
and secondly, right to a fair hearing. The principle of equal treatment 
of parties applies not only to the arbitral proceedings, but also to 
the procedure for appointment of arbitrators. The section casts a 
responsibility on the arbitrator to act impartially, objectively, and without 
bias, and also on the parties to adhere to standards of fairness. The 
principle of ‘equal treatment of the parties’ means that the parties 
must have the possibility of participating in the constitution of the 
arbitral tribunal on equal terms. 
34.	 Equal participation of the parties in the process of appointment of 
arbitrators entails that the contracting parties have an equal say in the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
49
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
constitution of the arbitral tribunal. Such participation eliminates the 
likelihood of challenges to the arbitrator at a later stage. It is needless 
to say that independence and impartiality in arbitral proceedings would 
be served only when the parties participate equally at all stages.
35.	 It would be apposite to refer to the following observations of P.S. 
Narasimha, J., in CORE II (supra):- 
“Distinct duties of arbitrators and arbitrating parties
231. There are two distinct obligations. The first is the 
obligation of the parties to the agreement, and the second 
is the neutrality and objectivity that an arbitrator must 
maintain. The obligations on the parties to the arbitration 
agreement to constitute an independent and impartial 
Arbitral Tribunal is distinct from the objectivity and 
impartiality that an arbitrator(s) must himself maintain. The 
foundation of the former is within the statutory framework, 
coupled with certain public policy considerations. The latter 
is simply the duty to act judicially, it is not superimposed 
by any statute or public policy, but arises because of the 
very nature of the calling i.e. to judge what is right and 
what is wrong.[…]”
(Emphasis supplied)
36.	 The principle of equal treatment of parties is not new to the arbitration 
regime in India. It has long been recognised that equal participation in 
the constitution of the arbitral tribunal is integral in ensuring impartiality 
and preserving fairness of the arbitral process. Even prior to the 
Amendment Act, 2015, this Court in Dharma Prathishthanam v. 
Madhok Construction (P) Ltd., reported in (2005) 9 SCC 686, 
held that a unilateral appointment, without the consent of the other 
party is illegal and alien to law. The relevant observations read thus:- 
“12. On a plain reading of the several provisions referred 
to hereinabove, we are clearly of the opinion that the 
procedure followed and the methodology adopted by the 
respondent is wholly unknown to law and the appointment 
of the sole arbitrator Shri Swami Dayal, the reference of 
disputes to such arbitrator and the ex parte proceedings 
and award given by the arbitrator are all void ab initio and 

50
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
hence nullity, liable to be ignored. In case of arbitration 
without the intervention of the court, the parties must 
rigorously stick to the agreement entered into between 
the two. If the arbitration clause names an arbitrator as 
the one already agreed upon, the appointment of an 
arbitrator poses no difficulty. If the arbitration clause does 
not name an arbitrator but provides for the manner in 
which the arbitrator is to be chosen and appointed, then 
the parties are bound to act accordingly. If the parties do 
not agree then arises the complication which has to be 
resolved by reference to the provisions of the Act. One 
party cannot usurp the jurisdiction of the court and proceed 
to act unilaterally. A unilateral appointment and a unilateral 
reference — both will be illegal. It may make a difference 
if in respect of a unilateral appointment and reference the 
other party submits to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator and 
waives its rights which it has under the agreement, then 
the arbitrator may proceed with the reference and the 
party submitting to his jurisdiction and participating in the 
proceedings before him may later on be precluded and 
estopped from raising any objection in that regard.[…]”
(Emphasis supplied)
37.	 What flows from the aforesaid is that the principle of equal treatment 
of parties which has always formed part of the Act, 1996, has been 
articulated with greater clarity and precision by the legislature through 
the Amendment Act, 2015. The Amendment Act, 2015, just crystallizes 
what was previously implicit. It makes the statutory guarantee of equal 
treatment in the process of appointment of the arbitrator explicit. 
38.	 One another good reason to hold the aforesaid is that, although 
Section 11(2) of the Act, 1996, stipulates that the parties are free to 
agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator or arbitrators, yet 
this freedom is not unbridled. The exercise of party autonomy must 
operate within the framework of the Act, 1996. In case of conflict, 
mandatory provisions of the Act, 1996, prevail over the arbitration 
agreement. 
39.	 The principle of party autonomy does not obliterate the principle of 
equal treatment of the parties, either in the procedure for appointment 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
51
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
of arbitrators or in the arbitral proceedings. The exercise of party 
autonomy has to be in consonance with the principles of equal 
treatment of parties, which impliedly include the independence and 
impartiality of arbitrators. 
b.	
Scope and Application of sub-section (5) of Section 12 of 
the Act, 1996
40.	 The Amendment Act, 2015, was introduced with the objective 
of ensuring neutrality of an arbitrator when he is approached in 
connection with a possible appointment. Therefore, with a view 
to inculcate the principles of independence and impartiality, the 
Amendment Act, 2015, brought amendments, inter alia, to Section 12 
of the Act, 1996. The amended section reads thus:-
“12. Grounds for challenge.—4 [(1) When a person is 
approached in connection with his possible appointment 
as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any 
circumstances,— 
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any 
past or present relationship with or interest in any of the 
parties or in relation to the subject-matter in dispute, 
whether financial, business, professional or other kind, 
which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his 
independence or impartiality; and 
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient 
time to the arbitration and in particular his ability to complete 
the entire arbitration within a period of twelve months. 
Explanation1.—The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule 
shall guide in determining whether circumstances exist 
which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence 
or impartiality of an arbitrator. 
Explanation 2.—The disclosure shall be made by such 
person in the form specified in the Sixth Schedule.] 
(2) An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and 
throughout the arbitral proceedings, shall, without delay, 
disclose to the parties in writing any circumstances 
referred to in sub-section (1) unless they have already 
been informed of them by him.

52
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(3) An arbitrator may be challenged only if— 
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts 
as to his independence or impartiality, or 
(b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by 
the parties. 
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, 
or in whose appointment he has participated, only for 
reasons of which he becomes aware after the appointment 
has been made. 
[(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, 
any person whose relationship, with the parties or counsel 
or the subject-matter of the dispute, falls under any of the 
categories specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be 
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator: 
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having 
arisen between them, waive the applicability of this sub-
section by an express agreement in writing.]” 
41.	 Sub-section (1) of Section 12 stipulates that when a person is 
approached to be an arbitrator, he must disclose in writing any 
circumstance which may fall under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-
section (1) respectively. Clause (a) relates to circumstances that may 
give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality. 
Whereas, clause (b) relates to disclosures about the person’s ability 
to devote sufficient time to the arbitration and to complete the 
proceedings within the prescribed time period. 
42.	 For disclosure under clause (a), the Fifth Schedule, consisting of 34 
items, is of aid. The items enumerated in the Fifth Schedule provides 
for the circumstances that may give rise to justifiable doubts about 
an arbitrator’s independence or impartiality after appointment. 
43.	 While the information required to be disclosed under clause (b) is 
personal to the individual and could be disclosed only by him. The 
disclosure has to be made in the form specified in the Sixth Schedule, 
and has to be made by all proposed arbitrators. It is noteworthy 
to mention that sub-section (1) comes into application prior to the 
appointment of a person as an arbitrator. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
53
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
44.	 Sub-section (2) of Section 12 states that from the appointment of 
the arbitrator and throughout the arbitral proceedings, the arbitrator 
must, without delay, disclose in writing any circumstance referred to 
in sub-section (1) that arises after his appointment. However, if the 
arbitrator has already informed the parties of the said circumstance 
earlier, he is not required to make a disclosure again. 
45.	 Sub-section (3) of Section 12 lays down two grounds for challenge 
to appointment of an arbitrator: first, if any circumstances exist that 
give rise to justifiable doubts about an arbitrator’s independence 
or impartiality. Secondly, if the arbitrator does not possess the 
qualifications agreed to by the parties. Sub-section (4) prescribes a 
caution. It states that a challenge to the appointment of an arbitrator 
could be maintained only on the grounds that were not disclosed 
during or after the appointment. 
46.	 Sub-section (5) of Section 12 states that any person whose 
relationship with the parties or counsel, or the subject-matter of the 
dispute, falls under any of the grounds mentioned in the Seventh 
Schedule would be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. It 
invalidates any prior agreement to the contrary, i.e., an agreement 
providing for appointment of an arbitrator who would become ineligible 
on the application of sub-section (5). The proviso to the sub-section 
provides that after dispute arises between the parties, they may 
waive the applicability of this provision by entering into an express 
agreement in writing. 
47.	 The Seventh Schedule lists 19 items, which also form part of the 34 
items of the Fifth Schedule. In other words, the Seventh Schedule 
is a subset of the Fifth Schedule. It is the duty of an arbitrator to 
keep in mind the items enlisted in the Fifth Schedule and make 
a disclosure in accordance with the Sixth Schedule. Out of the 
said 34 items, the legislature has placed 19 items in the Seventh 
Schedule which make an arbitrator ineligible for appointment. 
We clarify with a view to obviate any confusion that the Seventh 
Schedule applies irrespective of whether the appointment has 
been made unilaterally. 
48.	 If any entry in the Seventh Schedule is attracted, the consequences 
under Section 12(5) follow. In such circumstances, the disclosure 
made by the arbitrator does not save the mandate of the arbitrator, 
and an agreement referred to in the proviso assumes importance. 

54
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
We shall discuss the scope and application of the sub-section (5), 
as well as its proviso, in more detail in the latter part of this 
judgment. 
49.	 We may now proceed to address the aforesaid issue. There have 
been submissions by the parties on the applicability of the Amendment 
Act, 2015, to the present case as the parties executed the License 
Agreement in 2010. Section 26 of the Amendment Act, 2015, makes 
it limpid that the Amendment Act, 2015, would apply to arbitral 
proceedings commenced on or after 23.10.2015. It is a well settled 
position of law that in the absence of any contrary stipulation in the 
agreement, arbitral proceedings commence when a notice invoking 
arbitration is received by the respondent. [See: Board of Control 
for Cricket in India v. Kochi Cricket Pvt. Ltd. & Ors., (2018) 6 
SCC 287]
50.	 In the present case, the parties have not agreed to a different 
commencement date. As a sequitur, the date of commencement of 
the arbitral proceedings was 27.11.2015, i.e., when the notice invoking 
arbitration was received by the respondent. Thus, the Amendment 
Act, 2015, more particularly, sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act, 
1996, would apply to the matter at hand. 
c.	
Appointment of the sole arbitrator in light of sub-section (5) 
of Section 12 of the Act, 1996
51.	 There is a conspectus of decisions of this Court which lay down 
that, Section 12 was amended with the objective of ensuring 
independence and impartiality of arbitrators. By virtue of sub-
section (5) of Section 12, any person whose relationship with the 
parties or counsel, or the dispute, whether direct or indirect, falls 
within any of the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule is 
rendered ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. We need not 
discuss all the decisions, but rather intend to refer and rely upon 
only a few of them. 
52.	 In TRF (supra), the arbitration agreement stated that any dispute 
or difference between the parties in connection with the agreement 
shall be referred to the sole arbitration of the Managing Director or 
his nominee. The issue before this Court was whether the Managing 
Director, after becoming ineligible by operation of law, is still eligible 
to nominate an arbitrator. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
55
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
In this context, a three Judge Bench of this Court categorically held 
that if any person falls under any of the categories mentioned in 
the Seventh Schedule, he would be ineligible to be appointed as 
an arbitrator. In the facts of the case, it was held that the Managing 
Director, by virtue of sub-section (5) of Section 12, acquired the 
disqualification under the Seventh Schedule. Thus, as he became 
ineligible by operation of law to act as an arbitrator, he could not 
have nominated another person as an arbitrator. The relevant 
observations read thus:-
“54. In such a context, the fulcrum of the controversy 
would be, can an ineligible arbitrator, like the Managing 
Director, nominate an arbitrator, who may be otherwise 
eligible and a respectable person. As stated earlier, we 
are neither concerned with the objectivity nor the individual 
respectability. We are only concerned with the authority 
or the power of the Managing Director. By our analysis, 
we are obligated to arrive at the conclusion that once the 
arbitrator has become ineligible by operation of law, he 
cannot nominate another as an arbitrator. The arbitrator 
becomes ineligible as per prescription contained in Section 
12(5) of the Act. It is inconceivable in law that person who 
is statutorily ineligible can nominate a person. Needless to 
say, once the infrastructure collapses, the superstructure 
is bound to collapse. One cannot have a building without 
the plinth. Or to put it differently, once the identity of the 
Managing Director as the sole arbitrator is lost, the power 
to nominate someone else as an arbitrator is obliterated. 
Therefore, the view expressed by the High Court is not 
sustainable and we say so.”
(Emphasis supplied)
53.	 In a similar fact situation wherein the arbitration agreement empowered 
the Chairman and Managing Director of the respondent to appoint 
a sole arbitrator, the issue before this Court in Bharat Broadband 
(supra) was whether the CMD, after becoming ineligible by operation 
of law, is still eligible to appoint an arbitrator. 
The Court held that where a person falls within any of the categories 
set out in the Seventh Schedule, which could be by virtue of a 

56
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
relationship with the parties, or their counsel, or the subject-matter of 
the dispute, such a person becomes ineligible to be appointed as an 
arbitrator. The ineligibility could be removed after dispute has arisen, 
and only if the parties waive the applicability of the provision by an 
“express agreement in writing”. The arbitrator becomes de jure unable 
to perform his function as he falls within the categories mentioned in 
the Seventh Schedule. The relevant observations read thus:-
“15. Section 12(5), on the other hand, is a new provision 
which relates to the de jure inability of an arbitrator to 
act as such. Under this provision, any prior agreement to 
the contrary is wiped out by the non obstante clause in 
Section 12(5) the moment any person whose relationship 
with the parties or the counsel or the subject-matter of 
the dispute falls under the Seventh Schedule. The sub-
section then declares that such person shall be “ineligible” 
to be appointed as arbitrator. The only way in which 
this ineligibility can be removed is by the proviso, which 
again is a special provision which states that parties 
may,  subsequent  to disputes having arisen between 
them, waive the applicability of Section 12(5) by an 
express agreement in writing. What is clear, therefore, is 
that where, under any agreement between the parties, 
a person falls within any of the categories set out in the 
Seventh Schedule, he is, as a matter of law, ineligible to 
be appointed as an arbitrator. The only way in which this 
ineligibility can be removed, again, in law, is that parties 
may after disputes have arisen between them, waive the 
applicability of this sub-section by an “express agreement 
in writing”. Obviously, the “express agreement in writing” 
has reference to a person who is interdicted by the Seventh 
Schedule, but who is stated by parties (after the disputes 
have arisen between them) to be a person in whom they 
have faith notwithstanding the fact that such person is 
interdicted by the Seventh Schedule.”
(Emphasis supplied)
54.	 We may also look into the decision of this Court in Perkins Eastman 
(supra), where the arbitration clause empowered the Chairman and 
Managing Director of the respondent to appoint a sole arbitrator. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
57
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
Following TRF (supra), this Court held that the Managing Director 
was incompetent to appoint the sole arbitrator because he would be 
deemed to have an interest in the outcome of the dispute. Since, 
the ineligibility stems from the operation of law, not only is a person 
having an interest in the dispute or its outcome ineligible to act as 
an arbitrator, but appointment by such a person would be ex facie 
invalid. The relevant observations read thus:- 
“20.  We thus have two categories of cases. The first, 
similar to the one dealt with in TRF Ltd. [TRF Ltd. v. Energo 
Engg. Projects Ltd., (2017) 8 SCC 377 : (2017) 4 SCC 
(Civ) 72] where the Managing Director himself is named 
as an arbitrator with an additional power to appoint any 
other person as an arbitrator. In the second category, the 
Managing Director is not to act as an arbitrator himself 
but is empowered or authorised to appoint any other 
person of his choice or discretion as an arbitrator. If, in 
the first category of cases, the Managing Director was 
found incompetent, it was because of the interest that 
he would be said to be having in the outcome or result 
of the dispute. The element of invalidity would thus be 
directly relatable to and arise from the interest that he 
would be having in such outcome or decision. If that be 
the test, similar invalidity would always arise and spring 
even in the second category of cases. If the interest that 
he has in the outcome of the dispute, is taken to be the 
basis for the possibility of bias, it will always be present 
irrespective of whether the matter stands under the first 
or second category of cases. We are conscious that if 
such deduction is drawn from the decision of this Court 
in  TRF Ltd.  [TRF Ltd.  v.  Energo Engg. Projects Ltd., 
(2017) 8 SCC 377 : (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 72] , all cases 
having clauses similar to that with which we are presently 
concerned, a party to the agreement would be disentitled 
to make any appointment of an arbitrator on its own and 
it would always be available to argue that a party or an 
official or an authority having interest in the dispute would 
be disentitled to make appointment of an arbitrator.
21. But, in our view that has to be the logical deduction 
from TRF Ltd. [TRF Ltd. v. Energo Engg. Projects Ltd., 

58
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(2017) 8 SCC 377 : (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 72] Para 50 of 
the decision shows that this Court was concerned with 
the issue, “whether the Managing Director, after becoming 
ineligible by operation of law, is he still eligible to nominate 
an arbitrator” The ineligibility referred to therein, was as a 
result of operation of law, in that a person having an interest 
in the dispute or in the outcome or decision thereof, must 
not only be ineligible to act as an arbitrator but must also 
not be eligible to appoint anyone else as an arbitrator and 
that such person cannot and should not have any role in 
charting out any course to the dispute resolution by having 
the power to appoint an arbitrator. The next sentences 
in the paragraph, further show that cases where both 
the parties could nominate respective arbitrators of their 
choice were found to be completely a different situation. 
The reason is clear that whatever advantage a party may 
derive by nominating an arbitrator of its choice would get 
counter-balanced by equal power with the other party. But, 
in a case where only one party has a right to appoint a 
sole arbitrator, its choice will always have an element of 
exclusivity in determining or charting the course for dispute 
resolution. Naturally, the person who has an interest in the 
outcome or decision of the dispute must not have the power 
to appoint a sole arbitrator. That has to be taken as the 
essence of the amendments brought in by the Arbitration 
and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 (3 of 2016) and 
recognised by the decision of this Court in TRF Ltd. [TRF 
Ltd. v. Energo Engg. Projects Ltd., (2017) 8 SCC 377 : 
(2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 72]”
(Emphasis supplied)
55.	 The Bombay High Court, in Lite Bite Foods Pvt. Ltd. v. AAI, reported 
in 2019 SCC OnLine Bom 5163, dealt with a submission similar 
to the one arising from Clause 75 of the License Agreement before 
us. It was contended that only when an employee of the respondent 
is the named arbitrator does such person become ineligible to act, 
and equally ineligible to nominate another arbitrator. 
The Court held that the embargo under sub-section (5) of Section 12 
is against granting any single party a unilateral or one-sided authority 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
59
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
in constituting the arbitral tribunal. We are in complete agreement 
with the observations of G. S. Patel, J., that, “The guiding principle 
is neutrality, independence, fairness and transparency even in the 
arbitral-forum selection process”. The relevant observations read thus:- 
“23. The present case may not be within the confines 
of  TRF Ltd., i.e. the tender approving authority is not 
both arbitrator and, if disqualified, the sole repository of 
arbitrator-appointing power. He is only the latter. But that 
now matters at all. Perkins Eastman clearly holds the field 
and it covers a situation precisely such as the present 
one where AAI — and only AAI — has the exclusive 
right of appointed (not merely nominating) an arbitrator. 
The question is not, as Ms. Munim would have it, the 
perceived bias or impartiality of the arbitrator. He may well 
be an unknown entity. The question is of one-sidedness 
in the arbitral tribunal appointment procedure itself. This 
is the destination to which Perkins Eastman takes us for 
it requires that there be neutrality in the dispute resolution 
process throughout. If I might be permitted a license, in 
my reading of it, what  Perkins Eastman  says is this : 
that you cannot have an impartial arbitration free from all 
justifiable doubt if the manner in which the arbitral tribunal 
is constituted itself is beset by justifiable doubt.”
xxx
25. Ms. Munim’s last submission is that the only prohibition 
is against a  named  person being the arbitrator or 
empowered to appoint an arbitrator. This is clearly incorrect. 
The interdiction runs against any one party being given 
unilateral or one-sided power in the matter of constitution 
of the arbitral tribunal.”
(Emphasis supplied)
56.	 The phrase “operation of law” mentioned in the aforesaid decisions 
covers the Act, 1996, as well as the Constitution of India and any 
other Central of State law. In Lombardi Engg. Ltd. v. Uttarakhand 
Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd., reported in (2024) 4 SCC 341, where one of 
us, J.B. Pardiwala, J., speaking for the Bench held that an arbitration 
agreement has to comply with the requirements of (i) Section 7 of 

60
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the Act, 1996; (ii) any other provisions of the Act, 1996, and Central/
State law; (iii) Constitution of India. We may refer to the following 
observations for the benefit of exposition:- 
“79.5. In State of A.P. v. P. Laxmi Devi [State of A.P. v. P. 
Laxmi Devi, (2008) 4 SCC 720] , this Court observed : 
(SCC p. 737, paras 33-34)
“33. According to Kelson, in every country there is a 
hierarchy of legal norms, headed by what he calls as 
the “grundnorm”. If a legal norm in a higher layer of 
this hierarchy conflicts with a legal norm in a lower 
layer the former will prevail…
34. In India the grundnorm is the Indian Constitution,…”
80. Thus, in the context of the arbitration agreement, the 
layers of the Grundnorm as per Kelsen’s theory would be 
in the following hierarchy:
(i) Constitution of India, 1950;
(ii) Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 & any other 
Central/State law;
(iii) Arbitration agreement entered into by the parties in light 
of Section 7 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
81. Thus, the arbitration agreement, has to comply with 
the requirements of the following and cannot fall foul of:
(i) Section 7 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act;
(ii) any other provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 & Central/State Law;
(iii) Constitution of India, 1950.”
(Emphasis supplied)
57.	 When an arbitration agreement is in violation of sub-section (5) 
of Section 12 of the Act, 1996, the parties can neither insist on 
appointment of an arbitrator in terms of the agreement nor would 
any appointment so made be valid in the eyes of law. 
58.	 Unilateral appointments are not consistent with the basic tenet of 
arbitration, i.e., mutual confidence in the arbitrator. It would not be 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
61
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
unreasonable for a party to apprehend that an arbitrator unilaterally 
appointed by the opposite party may not act with complete impartiality. 
59.	 The test to determine bias is not actual proof of bias but reasonable 
apprehension of bias. The moment this apprehension takes birth 
in the mind of a party, the trust in the arbitral proceedings dies. A 
Constitution Bench of this Court in CORE II (supra), wherein one of 
us, J. B. Pardiwala, J., was a part of the Bench, laid down the test 
for real likelihood of bias. It reads thus:- 
“(b) Real likelihood of bias
92.  The  nemo judex  rule may be applicable where 
a Judge’s conduct or circumstances give rise to an 
apprehension of bias. In such situations, the Judge does 
not have a financial or cause-based interest in the outcome 
of the dispute but provides benefit to a party by failing 
to be neutral and impartial. The determination of bias 
does not depend upon actual proof of bias but whether 
there is a real possibility of bias based on the facts and 
circumstances.
xxx
(iv) Indian approach to the bias test
103. This Court has consistently adopted the real likelihood 
test to determine bias. [Rattan Lal Sharma v. Hari Ram 
(Co-Education) Higher Secondary School, (1993) 4 SCC 
10, para 11 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 1106] In Manak Lal v. Prem 
Chand Singhvi [Manak Lal v. Prem Chand Singhvi, 1957 
SCC OnLine SC 10, para 4] , P.B. Gajendragadkar, J. 
(as the learned Chief Justice then was) observed that 
the test to determine bias is whether a litigant could 
reasonably apprehend that a bias attributable to a member 
of the tribunal might have operated against him in the 
final decision. In  S. Parthasarathi  v.  State of A.P.  [S. 
Parthasarathi v. State of A.P., (1974) 3 SCC 459, para 
14 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 580 : 1973 SCC (L&S) 580] , K.K. 
Mathew, J. observed that the test of likelihood of bias is 
based on the reasonable apprehension of a reasonable 
man fully cognizant of the facts. The learned Judge further 
observed that the question of whether the real likelihood 

62
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of bias exists is to be determined on the probabilities to 
be inferred from the objective circumstances by a court 
or based on impressions that might reasonably be left on 
the minds of the aggrieved party or the public at large. 
[S. Parthasarathi, (1974) 3 SCC 459, p. 465, para 16. 
It was observed:“16. The tests of “real likelihood” and 
“reasonable suspicion” are really inconsistent with each 
other. We think that the reviewing authority must make a 
determination on the basis of the whole evidence before 
it, whether a reasonable man would in the circumstances 
infer that there is real likelihood of bias.[…].”
(Emphasis supplied) 
60.	 It is apposite to understand that Section 12(5) does not prohibit 
unilateral appointment of an arbitrator. It provides that whenever an 
appointment of an arbitrator is hit by the bar under Section 12(5), 
the arbitrator would be ineligible to act, irrespective of whether the 
appointment was unilateral or with consent of both parties. In such 
circumstances, the parties may, in the manner provided under the 
proviso, waive the ineligibility. We shall discuss the scope and 
application of the proviso in more detail in the latter part of this 
judgment. 
d.	
De Jure inability of the arbitrator to perform his functions
61.	 In the aforesaid context, it would be apposite to briefly explain what 
constitutes as de jure ineligibility under Section 12(5). The expression 
de jure denotes a condition rooted in strict compliance with the 
requirements of law. De jure inability refers to a situation in which an 
arbitrator is legally incapable of performing his functions and is, by 
operation of law, barred from continuing in office. Such inability strikes 
at the very root of the arbitrator’s authority to act, thereby affecting 
his inherent capacity to discharge his functions as an arbitrator. It 
is this legal incapacity, arising from statutory disqualifications, that 
results in the termination of the “mandate of an arbitrator” under 
Section 14(1)(a) of the Act, 1996. 
62.	 De jure inability referred to under Section 14(1)(a) may arise from 
the provisions of the Act, 1996, or from any other existing law that 
renders an arbitrator legally incapable of performing his functions. As 
regards de jure ineligibility, it flows from sub-section (5) of Section 12 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
63
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
read with the Seventh Schedule, which disqualifies certain persons 
from being appointed or continuing as arbitrators. 
63.	 In other words, the ineligibility under Section 12(5) precedes de jure 
inability under Section 14(1)(a). In other words, de jure ineligibility is 
the specie and de jure inability is the genus. To put this in context, 
de jure inability is determined when an aggrieved party is able to 
indicate that the circumstances under the Seventh Schedule have 
been met. 
64.	 It would be worthwhile to refer to the observations made by this 
Court in HRD Corpn v. GAIL (India) Ltd., reported in (2018) 12 
SCC 471. It was observed thus:-
“12. After the 2016 Amendment Act, a dichotomy is made 
by the Act between persons who become “ineligible” to be 
appointed as arbitrators, and persons about whom justifiable 
doubts exist as to their independence or impartiality. Since 
ineligibility goes to the root of the appointment, Section 
12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule makes it clear that 
if the arbitrator falls in any one of the categories specified 
in the Seventh Schedule, he becomes “ineligible” to act 
as arbitrator. Once he becomes ineligible, it is clear that, 
under Section 14(1)(a), he then becomes de jure unable to 
perform his functions inasmuch as, in law, he is regarded 
as “ineligible”.[…]”
(Emphasis supplied)
65.	 The Madras High Court in Clarke Energy India Pvt. Ltd. v. SAS 
EPC Solution Pvt. Ltd. & Anr., reported in 2021 SCC OnLine Mad 
6121, observed thus:- 
“22. Turning to de jure inability to perform functions, it 
should be noted at the threshold that the expression is not 
defined in the Arbitration Act. The word ‘de jure’ in Latin 
means “as a matter of law”. It has been defined in Black’s 
Law Dictionary, 11 Edition (2019), as “existing by right or 
according to law”. Thus, it appears that the expression de 
jure applies undoubtedly to legal disability. One illustration 
of legal disability would be if the arbitrator is ineligible in 
terms of the Seventh Schedule. This was expressly dealt 
with by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in HRD Corporation as 

64
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
well as  Bharat Broadband.[…] However, ineligibility is 
only one illustration of de jure inability to function. It is 
conceivable that an arbitrator may be afflicted by some 
form of cognitive impairment. If such cognitive impairment is 
serious enough to lead to an inference that such arbitrator 
is not of sound mind, whether on account of schizophrenia, 
Alzheimer’s disease or the like, as understood in the 
Indian Contract Act, 1872, it would result in de jure inability 
to function even if the arbitrator concerned declines to 
withdraw. Less serious forms of cognitive impairment, such 
as bipolar disorder and the like, may, on the other hand, 
may pose greater challenges. Besides, an arbitrator may 
be adjudged insolvent after entering upon reference. By 
relying upon the applicable insolvency statute, it could be 
contended with a fair measure of justification that he is de 
jure unable to function.”
(Emphasis supplied)
66.	 It would be apposite to refer to the relevant Items under the head 
“Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel” in the Seventh 
Schedule of the Act, 1996, for the purpose of matter at hand. It 
reads thus:- 
“THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 12(5)]
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel 
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or 
has any other past or present business relationship with 
a party. 
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of 
the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties. 
xxx
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the 
management, or has a similar controlling influence, in 
an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly 
involved in the matters in dispute in the arbitration. 
xxx

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
65
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the 
management, or has a similar controlling influence in one 
of the parties. 
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one 
of the parties or the outcome of the case. […]”
67.	 From the above exposition of law, the Chairman of the respondent 
was wholly ineligible to appoint an arbitrator. The Items 1, 2, 5, 12, 
and 13 of the Seventh Schedule respectively, clearly attach to the 
Chairman of the respondent. Once the Chairman is rendered ineligible 
by operation of law, he cannot nominate or appoint another person 
as an arbitrator. To illustrate, one who cannot sit on a chair himself 
cannot authorise another to sit on it either. 
68.	 We are in complete agreement that the present case is squarely 
covered by the decisions of this Court in Perkins Eastman (supra) and 
Bharat Broadband (supra) respectively. The unilateral appointment of 
a sole arbitrator is void ab initio, and the sole arbitrator so appointed 
is de jure ineligible to act as an arbitrator in terms of Section 12(5) 
read with the Seventh Schedule of the Act, 1996. 
69.	 Thus, we have no hesitation in saying that its High Court, in the 
impugned judgment, committed an error in holding that the appointment 
was not unilateral merely because the respondent proceeded to 
appoint the sole arbitrator pursuant to notice invoking arbitration. 
70.	 We would like to clarify that a notice under Section 21 of the Act, 
1996, is an expression to set the arbitration agreement into motion 
upon arising of disputes between the parties. The section states that 
the date of commencement of arbitration would be the date on which 
the recipient receives the notice from the claimant that the dispute be 
referred to arbitration. The notice acts as a communication that the 
sender is aggrieved and seeks to invoke the arbitration agreement. 
It does not, by itself, operate as consent to any appointment to be 
made in the future. 
ii.	
Whether the parties could be said to have waived the 
applicability of sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act, 
1996, by way of their conduct, either expressed or implied? 
71.	 It was submitted on behalf of the appellants herein that the appellants 
never waived their right to object in terms of the proviso to Section 

66
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
12(5) of the Act, 1996. The proviso to Section 12(5) requires that 
the ineligibility of an arbitrator could only be waived by an “express 
agreement in writing” between the parties, and such agreement must 
be entered into after the dispute has arisen. It was further canvassed 
by the appellants that no agreement was executed, signed, or even 
contemplated by the parties to this effect after the dispute arose. 
72.	 In this regard, the respondent vociferously submitted that the present 
case falls within the proviso to Section 12(5). To indicate the same, 
instances like recording of “no objection” in the first procedural 
order, submission of statement of claim, the joint request to extend 
the mandate under Section 29A, and continued participation in the 
proceedings, were highlighted to submit that the appellants had 
waived their right to object. The procedural order constitutes an 
“express agreement in writing” and satisfies the requirement under 
the proviso to Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996. At the cost of repetition, 
the procedural order reads thus:-
“PROCEDURAL ORDER NO. 1
With
Minutes of, and the Directions made at, the hearing on 
22.03.2016 at 1:00 pm
[AT D-247 (Basement), Defence Colony, New Delhi-110024]
This preliminary meeting of the Tribunal was held D-247 
(Basement), Defence Colony, New Delhi-110024 on 
22nd March, 2016 at 1:00 PM. None of the parties have 
any objection to my appointment as the Sole Arbitrator. I 
declare that I have no interest in any of the Parties, or in 
the disputes referred to the Sole Arbitrator.[…]” 
(Emphasis supplied)
73.	 On the aforesaid issue, the High Court, in its impugned judgment, 
observed that the sole arbitrator obtained the consent of the parties 
for the purpose of continuing to arbitrate in the form of the procedural 
order. What weighed with the High Court was that the appellants 
participated in the proceedings, which continued for over two years, 
and did not they invoke Section 12(5), or object against the jurisdiction 
of the arbitrator at any stage. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
67
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
a.	
Meaning and Import of the expression “express agreement 
in writing” used in proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 
12 of the Act, 1996 
74.	 Sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act, 1996, reads thus:-
“[(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, 
any person whose relationship, with the parties or counsel 
or the subject-matter of the dispute, falls under any of the 
categories specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be 
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator: 
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having 
arisen between them, waive the applicability of this sub-
section by an express agreement in writing.]” 
75.	 The essentials of the proviso to Section 12(5) are:-
i.	
The parties can waive their right to object under sub-section 
(5) of Section 12; 
ii.	
The right to object under the sub-section can be waived only 
subsequent to a dispute having arisen between the parties; 
iii.	
The waiver must be in the form of an express agreement in 
writing. 
76.	 The proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 12 stipulates that parties, 
after disputes have arisen, must expressly agree in writing to waive 
the ineligibility of the proposed arbitrator. This impliedly means that 
the parties are waiving their right to object to the arbitrator’s ineligibility 
in terms of Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996. 
77.	 Waiver means the intentional giving up of a right. It involves a 
conscious decision to abandon an existing legal right, benefit, claim, 
or privilege that a party would otherwise have been entitled to. It 
amounts to an agreement not to enforce that right. A waiver can 
occur only when the person making it is fully aware of the right in 
question and, with complete knowledge, chooses to give it up. [See: 
State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar, (2011) 14 SCC 770]
78.	 What flows from the aforesaid is when a right exists, i.e., the right to 
object to the appointment of an ineligible arbitrator in terms of Section 
12(5), such a right cannot be taken away by mere implication. For 
a party to be deprived of this right by way of waiver, there must be 

68
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
a conscious and unequivocal expression of intent to relinquish it. 
Needless to say, for a waiver to be valid, it is necessary that the actor 
demonstrates the intention to act, and for an act to be intentional, 
the actor must understand the act and its consequences.
79.	 The expression “express agreement in writing” demonstrates a 
deliberate and informed act that although a party is fully aware of 
the arbitrator’s ineligibility, yet it chooses to forego the right to object 
against the appointment of such an arbitrator. The requirement of 
an express agreement in writing has been introduced as it reflects 
awareness and a conscious intention to waive the right to object 
under sub-section (5) of Section 12. A clear manifestation of the 
expression of waiver assumes greater importance in light of the fact 
that the parties are overcoming a restriction imposed by law. 
80.	 It is in the same breath we say that appointment of an arbitrator 
with the consent of both parties is the general rule, while unilateral 
appointment is an exception. When one party appoints an arbitrator 
unilaterally, even if its own consent is implicit, the consent of the 
opposite party stands compromised, and the choice of the former 
is effectively imposed upon the latter. 
81.	 It is only through an express agreement in writing, waiving the bar 
under sub-section (5) of Section 12, that the other party can be 
said to have voluntarily consented to the unilateral appointment of 
such an arbitrator. The proviso conveys that the arbitrator, although 
ineligible to be appointed, yet can continue to perform his functions, 
as it is oriented towards facilitating party autonomy. Thus, the 
proviso reinforces party autonomy and equal treatment of parties 
in arbitration. 
82.	 In other words, even though the appointment had been made by one 
of the parties, by the act of entering into an agreement in writing, 
the other party expresses its consent. The manner of the agreement 
prescribed by the statute demonstrates voluntariness by the parties. 
83.	 In a case of unilateral appointment, the waiver mentioned in the 
proviso is an indication of party autonomy in two ways: first, that the 
parties, by entering into an agreement, are waiving the bar under 
Section 12(5). Secondly, by the act of entering into an agreement, the 
parties, more particularly, the non-consenting party, are expressing 
their consent for appointment of the proposed arbitrator. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
69
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
84.	 Undoubtedly, the statute does not prescribe a format for the 
agreement. However, the absence of a prescribed format cannot 
be construed to mean that the waiver may be inferred impliedly or 
through conduct. We say so because the legislature has consciously 
prefaced the term “agreement” with the word “express” and followed 
it with the phrase “in writing”. This semantics denote the intention 
of the legislature that the waiver under the proviso to Section 12(5) 
must be made only through an express and written manifestation 
of intention. 
85.	 The conscious use of the prefatory expression also serves to 
differentiate such waiver from ‘deemed waiver’ as stipulated under 
Section 4 of the Act, 1996. We must be mindful of the fact that if the 
legislature intended that waiver under Section 12(5) could similarly 
arise by implication or conduct as mentioned under Section 4, it 
would have refrained from introducing a heightened and mandatory 
requirement, more particularly, in light of the rigours of the Seventh 
Schedule. The statutory design therefore makes it evident that the 
bar under Section 12(5) can be removed only by a clear, unequivocal, 
and written agreement executed after the dispute has arisen, and 
not by any form of tacit acceptance or procedural participation. 
86.	 The mandate of an express agreement in writing in the present case 
may looked at from one another angle. The unilateral appointment of 
an arbitrator is assessed from the viewpoint of the parties. However, 
when the parties later execute an express written agreement waiving 
the ineligibility of the proposed arbitrator, the position gets altered. 
Such written waiver supplies the very consent that was previously 
missing, thereby placing the appointment on the same footing as 
a mutually agreed appointment and addresses concerns regarding 
neutrality and fairness. 
87.	 In Bharat Broadband (supra), this Court categorically held that the 
expression “express agreement in writing” refers to an agreement 
made in words and cannot be inferred by conduct. The word “express” 
denotes that the agreement must be entered into with complete 
knowledge that although the proposed arbitrator is ineligible to be 
appointed as an arbitrator, yet they express their confidence in him 
to continue as the arbitrator. The relevant observations read thus:- 
“20. This then brings us to the applicability of the proviso 
to Section 12(5) on the facts of this case. Unlike Section 

70
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
4 of the Act which deals with deemed waiver of the 
right to object by conduct, the proviso to Section 12(5) 
will only apply if subsequent to disputes having arisen 
between the parties, the parties waive the applicability of 
sub-section (5) of Section 12 by an express agreement 
in writing. For this reason, the argument based on the 
analogy of Section 7 of the Act must also be rejected. 
Section 7 deals with arbitration agreements that must be 
in writing, and then explains that such agreements may 
be contained in documents which provide a record of such 
agreements. On the other hand, Section 12(5) refers to an 
“express agreement in writing”. The expression “express 
agreement in writing” refers to an agreement made in 
words as opposed to an agreement which is to be inferred 
by conduct. Here, Section 9 of the Contract Act, 1872 
becomes important. It states:
“9. Promises, express and implied.—Insofar as the 
proposal or acceptance of any promise is made in 
words, the promise is said to be express. Insofar as 
such proposal or acceptance is made otherwise than 
in words, the promise is said to be implied.”
It is thus necessary that there be an “express” agreement 
in writing. This agreement must be an agreement by which 
both parties, with full knowledge of the fact that Shri Khan 
is ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator, still go ahead 
and say that they have full faith and confidence in him to 
continue as such. The facts of the present case disclose 
no such express agreement. The appointment letter which 
is relied upon by the High Court as indicating an express 
agreement on the facts of the case is dated 17-1-2017. 
On this date, the Managing Director of the appellant was 
certainly not aware that Shri Khan could not be appointed by 
him as Section 12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule only 
went to the invalidity of the appointment of the Managing 
Director himself as an arbitrator. Shri Khan’s invalid 
appointment only became clear after the declaration of the 
law by the Supreme Court in TRF Ltd. [TRF Ltd. v. Energo 
Engg. Projects Ltd., (2017) 8 SCC 377 : (2017) 4 SCC 
(Civ) 72] which, as we have seen hereinabove, was only on 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
71
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
3-7-2017. After this date, far from there being an express 
agreement between the parties as to the validity of Shri 
Khan’s appointment, the appellant filed an application on 
7-10-2017 before the sole arbitrator, bringing the arbitrator’s 
attention to the judgment in TRF Ltd. [TRF Ltd. v. Energo 
Engg. Projects Ltd., (2017) 8 SCC 377 : (2017) 4 SCC 
(Civ) 72] and asking him to declare that he has become de 
jure incapable of acting as an arbitrator. Equally, the fact 
that a statement of claim may have been filed before 
the arbitrator, would not mean that there is an express 
agreement in words which would make it clear that both 
parties wish Shri Khan to continue as arbitrator despite 
being ineligible to act as such. This being the case, the 
impugned judgment is not correct when it applies Section 4, 
Section 7, Section 12(4), Section 13(2) and Section 16(2) 
of the Act to the facts of the present case, and goes on 
to state that the appellant cannot be allowed to raise the 
issue of eligibility of an arbitrator, having itself appointed 
the arbitrator. The judgment under appeal is also incorrect 
in stating that there is an express waiver in writing from 
the fact that an appointment letter has been issued by the 
appellant, and a statement of claim has been filed by the 
respondent before the arbitrator. The moment the appellant 
came to know that Shri Khan’s appointment itself would 
be invalid, it filed an application before the sole arbitrator 
for termination of his mandate.”
(Emphasis supplied)
88.	 In CORE II (supra), this Court underscored the rationale behind the 
first two essentials of the proviso. It reads thus:- 
“121.  An objection to the bias of an adjudicator can 
be waived. [Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record 
Assn. v. Union of India, (2016) 5 SCC 808, para 30 : (2016) 
3 SCC (Civ) 492 : (2016) 3 SCC (Cri) 173 : (2016) 2 SCC 
(L&S) 253] A waiver is an intentional relinquishment of 
a right by a party or an agreement not to assert a right. 
[State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar, (2011) 14 
SCC 770, para 41 : (2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 1034 : (2012) 4 
SCC (Cri) 496 : (2014) 1 SCC (L&S) 208] The Arbitration 

72
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Act allows parties to waive the application of Section 12(5) 
by an express agreement after the disputes have arisen. 
However, the waiver is subject to two factors. First, the 
parties can only waive the applicability of Section 12(5) after 
the dispute has arisen. This allows parties to determine 
whether they will be required or necessitated to draw 
upon the services of specific individuals as arbitrators to 
decide upon specific issues. To this effect, Explanation 3 
to the Seventh Schedule recognises that certain kinds of 
arbitration such as maritime or commodities arbitration 
may require the parties to draw upon a small, specialised 
pool. [ “Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is 
clarified that it may be the practice in certain specific kinds 
of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, 
to draw arbitrators from a small, specialised pool. If in such 
fields it is the custom and practice for parties frequently, 
to appoint the same arbitrator in different cases, this is 
a relevant fact to be taken into account while applying 
the rules set out above.”] The second requirement of the 
proviso to Section 12(5) is that parties must consciously 
abandon their existing legal right through an express 
agreement. Thus, the Arbitration Act reinforces the 
autonomy of parties by allowing them to override the 
limitations of independence and impartiality by an express 
agreement in that regard.”
(Emphasis supplied)
89.	 What can be discerned from the above discussion is that the 
ineligibility of an arbitrator can be waived only by an express 
agreement in writing. In the present case, there is no agreement in 
writing, after the disputes arose, waiving the ineligibility of the sole 
arbitrator or the right to object under Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996. 
90.	 The conduct of the parties is inconsequential and does not constitute 
a valid waiver under the proviso. The requirement of the waiver to 
be made expressly in the form of agreement in writing ensures that 
parties are not divested of their right to object inadvertently or by 
procedural happenstance. 
91.	 We are not impressed by the aforesaid submission of the respondent 
for all the reasons stated above. The following decisions of this 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
73
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
Court and the High Court of Delhi respectively deal with the all 
the factual submissions made by the respondent to submit that 
the present case falls within the proviso to Section 12(5) of the 
Act, 1996. 
b.	
“Statement of Claim” as a parameter of waiver 
92.	 One another submission that was canvassed on behalf of the 
respondent herein is that the appellants participated in the arbitral 
proceedings by submitting their statement of claim wherein it was 
stated that they submit to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator. The 
observations of this Court in paragraph 20 of Bharat Broadband 
(supra) squarely cover this issue. It was held that filing a statement 
of claim cannot be equated to an “express agreement in writing” in 
terms of proviso to Section 12(5).
c.	
“Extension of Time” under Section 29A of the Act, 1996 as 
a parameter of waiver 
93.	 Recently, in Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. v. Bihar Rajya 
Pul Nirman Nigam Ltd., reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2578, 
wherein one of us, J. B. Pardiwala, J., was a part of the Bench, held 
that Section 29A amounts to a valid waiver under Section 4, save in 
cases of statutory ineligibility under Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996. 
The relevant observations read thus:-
“13.8. In the present case, the respondents had ample 
opportunity to object. Instead, both parties jointly moved 
for extension under Section 29A, not once but thrice. This 
leads directly to the interplay between Sections 4, 12(5) 
and 29A.
13.9. Section 29A empowers courts to extend the mandate 
of an arbitral tribunal, either on a party’s application or 
upon sufficient cause. Its object is to prevent termination 
of proceedings by efflux of time and to ensure continuity. 
A joint application under Section 29A stands on a distinct 
footing from ordinary acts of participation such as filing 
pleadings. When both parties jointly seek an extension, 
they signify continued consent and confidence in the 
tribunal. Under Section 29A(5), even a single party may 
apply; the other is free to oppose. The Court may, in its 

74
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
discretion, extend the mandate with or without substituting 
the arbitrator.
13.10. Thus, when a party joins in seeking extension under 
Section 29A despite having the opportunity to object or 
seek termination, it signifies a higher degree of consent. 
However, such consent cannot be equated with an express 
written waiver under Section 12(5). The statutory language 
is categorical: only an express written post-dispute waiver 
can cure Seventh Schedule ineligibility.”
(Emphasis supplied)
94.	 In Man Industries (India) Ltd. v. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., 
reported in 2023 SCC OnLine Del 3537, the petitioner had filed 
two applications under Section 29A of the Act, 1996, seeking an 
extension of time for completion of the arbitral proceedings. The 
respondent therein had contended that filing of an application under 
Section 29A would satisfy the requirement of the proviso to Section 
12(5), and that the ineligibility attached to the sole arbitrator would 
thereby stand removed. The Court observed thus:-
“11. He submits that in the present case, the petitioner 
has never challenged the eligibility of the learned Sole 
Arbitrator to adjudicate on the disputes between the 
parties. He submits that, in fact, the learned Arbitrator was 
appointed at the request of the petitioner. The learned 
Arbitrator before entering upon the reference submitted 
his disclosure as required under Section 12 of the Act. 
The petitioner never raised any objection to the eligibility 
of the learned Sole Arbitrator. Thereafter, the petitioner, in 
fact, twice filed applications under Section 29A of the Act 
seeking extension of the mandate of the learned Arbitrator. 
He submits that the filing of the application under Section 
29A of the Act by the petitioner would, in fact, satisfy the 
Proviso to Section 12(5) of the Act and the ineligibility, if at 
all, attached to the learned Sole Arbitrator would be waived.
xxx
22. In view of the above authorities, there can be no doubt 
that the learned Arbitrator appointed by the respondent 
was de jure ineligible to act as such. The petitioner by its 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
75
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
participation in the arbitration proceedings or by its filing of 
applications under Section 29A of the Act seeking extension 
of the mandate of the learned Arbitrator, cannot be said to 
have waived the ineligibility of the learned Arbitrator under 
Section 12(5) of the Act, and, therefore, the Arbitral Award 
passed by the learned Arbitrator is invalid.”
(Emphasis supplied)
d.	
“Continued Participation” as a parameter of waiver 
95.	 In Govind Singh v. Satya Group Pvt. Ltd., reported in 2023 SCC 
OnLine Del 37, the contention before the Delhi High Court was that 
the appellant therein by its conduct had waived its right to object to the 
unilateral appointment of the sole arbitrator. The Court categorically 
held that it is not necessary to even examine whether the appellant 
had raised an objection. Even if the appellant had participated in 
the proceedings without raising any objection, it cannot be said that 
he had waived his right under Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996. The 
relevant observations read thus:-
“19. The contention that the appellant by its conduct has 
waived its right to object to the appointment of the learned 
Arbitrator is also without merit. The question whether a party 
can, by its conduct, waive its right under Section 12(5) of 
the A&C Act is no longer res integra. The Supreme Court 
in the case of Bharat Broadband Network Limited v. United 
Telecoms Limited : (2019) 5 SCC 755 had explained that 
any waiver under Section 12(5) of the A&C Act would 
be valid only if it is by an express agreement in writing. 
There is no scope for imputing any implied waiver of the 
rights under Section 12(5) of the A&C Act by conduct or 
otherwise.[…]
20.  Thus, it is not necessary to examine the question 
whether the appellant had raised an objection to the 
appointment of the learned Arbitrator. Even if it is 
assumed that the appellant had participated in the 
arbitral proceedings without raising any objection to the 
appointment of the learned Arbitrator, it is not open to 
hold that he had waived his right under Section 12(5) of 

76
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the A&C Act. Although it is not material, the record does 
indicate that the appellant had objected to the appointment 
of respondent no. 2 as an arbitrator.”
(Emphasis supplied)
96.	 The net effect of the aforesaid is that a notice invoking the arbitration 
clause under Section 21 of the Act, 1996, a procedural order, 
submission of statement of claim by the appellants, the filing an 
application seeking interim relief, or a reply to an application under 
Section 33 of the Act, 1996, cannot be countenanced to mean “an 
express agreement in writing” within the meaning of the proviso to 
sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act, 1996. 
97.	 One could argue that a miscreant party may participate in the 
arbitral proceedings up to the passing of the award, despite having 
full knowledge of the arbitrator’s ineligibility. While after an adverse 
award is rendered, such a party may then seek to challenge it with 
a view to having it set aside. Such an apprehension is reasonable, 
however, to obviate the possibility of such misuse, the party making 
unilateral appointment must endeavour to enter into an express 
written agreement as stipulated in the proviso to Section 12(5), so 
as to safeguard the proceedings from being rendered futile. 
98.	 Thus, all the High Court decisions taking a contrary view to the 
present judgment would stand overruled. 
iii.	
Whether the appellants could have raised an objection to 
the appointment of the sole arbitrator for the first time in 
an application under Section 34 of the Act, 1996? 
99.	 It was submitted by the appellants that an objection in relation to de 
jure ineligibility of the sole arbitrator could be raised at any stage, 
including for the first time in proceedings under Section 34 of the 
Act, 1996. In this regard reliance was placed on Section 34(2)(b) 
which empowers the court to set aside an award if “the Court finds 
that” it is in conflict with the public policy of India. Therefore, even 
if the objection to unilateral appointment is not raised by a party, 
the Court may itself declare an award to be null and void due to 
unilateral appointment of the arbitrator in terms of Section 34(2)(b). 
100.	On the contrary, the respondent submitted that since the appellants 
did not raise any objection to the constitution, appointment or 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
77
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
jurisdiction of the sole arbitrator under Sections 13 or 14 of the Act, 
1996, respectively, during the pendency of the arbitration, they are 
barred from raising it under an application under Section 34. 
101.	On the aforesaid issue, the High Court held that the present case 
cannot be equated with cases in which an objection to the appointment 
of the arbitrator has been raised throughout the proceedings, or at 
every stage. Further, even after sub-section (5) of Section 12 was 
introduced in the statute, the appellants did not approach the court 
under Section 14 of the Act, 1996, challenging the jurisdiction of 
the arbitrator. Thus, the challenge to the appointment of the sole 
arbitrator was clearly an “afterthought”. 
a.	
Challenge to the ineligibility of the arbitrator during the 
proceedings 
102.	The law in this regard is fairly settled. Where a party is aggrieved 
by the ineligibility of an arbitrator under Section 12(5), it may directly 
approach the court under Section 14 of the Act, 1996. There is no 
doubt that when an arbitrator is ineligible under Section 12(5), i.e., 
he lacks inherent jurisdiction to hold the position, his mandate stands 
automatically terminated, and it is not necessary for the parties to 
challenge his appointment under Section 12 read with Section 13. 
When such a challenge is made, the court is required to determine 
whether the arbitrator suffers from de jure inability under Section 
14(1)(a) of the Act, 1996.
103.	An application under Section 14 is made for the purpose of terminating 
the mandate of the arbitrator, and, consequently, a substitute arbitrator 
is appointed in terms of Section 15(2). As regards where the mandate 
of the arbitrator has been terminated with the consent of both the 
parties under Section 15(1)(b), it is not required for the parties to 
approach the court to seek termination of the mandate of the arbitrator, 
because it has been terminated by the parties themselves. 
104.	It is apposite to understand that in a case of ineligibility of the arbitrator, 
the substitution of the arbitrator is sought because the termination of 
mandate of the arbitrator does not result in the termination of arbitral 
proceedings. The proceedings remain intact, only the composition 
of the arbitral tribunal changes. The termination of mandate of 
the arbitrator is distinguishable from the termination of the arbitral 
proceedings and of the arbitral tribunal as well. By substitution of 

78
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the arbitrator, the proceedings would commence from thereon and 
save the parties from initiating fresh proceedings. 
105.	In HRD (supra), it was held that once an arbitrator becomes ineligible 
to act as an arbitrator, he is rendered de jure incapable of performing 
his functions. In such circumstances, it is not necessary for the 
parties to approach the arbitral tribunal under Section 13, for an 
arbitrator who is de jure ineligible lacks the inherent jurisdiction to 
proceed any further. In such a case, an application under Section 
14(2) must be filed before the court for termination of the mandate 
of the arbitrator. The relevant observations read thus:- 
“12.  […] Once he becomes ineligible, it is clear that, 
under Section 14(1)(a), he then becomes de jure unable 
to perform his functions inasmuch as, in law, he is 
regarded as “ineligible”. In order to determine whether an 
arbitrator is de jure unable to perform his functions, it is 
not necessary to go to the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 
13. Since such a person would lack inherent jurisdiction 
to proceed any further, an application may be filed under 
Section 14(2) to the Court to decide on the termination of 
his/her mandate on this ground. As opposed to this, in a 
challenge where grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule are 
disclosed, which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the 
arbitrator’s independence or impartiality, such doubts as 
to independence or impartiality have to be determined as 
a matter of fact in the facts of the particular challenge by 
the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 13. If a challenge is not 
successful, and the Arbitral Tribunal decides that there are 
no justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality 
of the arbitrator/arbitrators, the Tribunal must then continue 
the arbitral proceedings under Section 13(4) and make 
an award. It is only after such award is made, that the 
party challenging the arbitrator’s appointment on grounds 
contained in the Fifth Schedule may make an application 
for setting aside the arbitral award in accordance with 
Section 34 on the aforesaid grounds.[…].”
(Emphasis supplied)
106.	We may refer with profit to the decision of this Court in Bharat 
Broadband (supra), wherein it was observed that when a person 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
79
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
becomes “ineligible” to be appointed as an arbitrator, the challenge 
to such appointment does not lie before the arbitrator himself. It 
was further observed that an appointment hit by Section 12(5) 
attracts Section 14(1)(a), as the arbitrator becomes de jure unable 
to perform his functions. As a result, the mandate of the arbitrator 
stands terminated. The relevant observations read thus:- 
“17. […] However, where such person becomes “ineligible” 
to be appointed as an arbitrator, there is no question of 
challenge to such arbitrator, before such arbitrator. In 
such a case i.e. a case which falls under Section 12(5), 
Section 14(1)(a) of the Act gets attracted inasmuch as 
the arbitrator becomes, as a matter of law (i.e. de jure), 
unable to perform his functions under Section 12(5), being 
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. This being 
so, his mandate automatically terminates, and he shall 
then be substituted by another arbitrator under Section 
14(1) itself. It is only if a controversy occurs concerning 
whether he has become de jure unable to perform his 
functions as such, that a party has to apply to the Court 
to decide on the termination of the mandate, unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties. Thus, in all Section 12(5) 
cases, there is no challenge procedure to be availed of. 
If an arbitrator continues as such, being de jure unable 
to perform his functions, as he falls within any of the 
categories mentioned in Section 12(5), read with the 
Seventh Schedule, a party may apply to the Court, which 
will then decide on whether his mandate has terminated. 
Questions which may typically arise under Section 14 
may be as to whether such person falls within any of 
the categories mentioned in the Seventh Schedule, or 
whether there is a waiver as provided in the proviso to 
Section 12(5) of the Act.[…].”
(Emphasis supplied)
107.	In Chennai Metro Rail Ltd. v. Transtonnelstroy Afcons (JV), 
reported in (2024) 6 SCC 211, this Court held that a party aggrieved 
by the ineligibility of an arbitrator may approach the court under 
Section 14(1)(a) of the Act, 1996. The relevant observations read 
thus:- 

80
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“29. At this stage it would be crucial to notice that the Court 
made a differentiation. It stated, firstly, that a disclosure 
in writing about circumstances likely to give justifiable 
doubts is to be made, at the stage of appointment, and 
then stated that the disclosure can be challenged under 
Sections 12(1) to 12(4) read with Section 13. The Court 
however underlined that in the next category where the 
person became ineligible to be appointed as arbitrator, 
there was no need for a challenge to be laid before the 
arbitrator. In such circumstances outlined in Section 12(5), 
the party aggrieved could directly approach the court under 
Section 14(1)(a). It was further underlined that in all cases 
under Section 12(5), there is no challenge procedure to be 
availed of and that if the arbitrator continues at such, the 
ground of being unable to perform his function since he 
falls in any of the categories enumerated in the Seventh 
Schedule, the party concerned may apply to the court.
xxx
33. The decisions in HRD [HRD Corpn. v. GAIL, (2018) 
12 SCC 471 : (2018) 5 SCC (Civ) 401] and  Bharat 
Broadband  [Bharat Broadband Network Ltd.  v.  United 
Telecoms Ltd., (2019) 5 SCC 755 : (2019) 3 SCC (Civ) 
1] are unequivocal and to the effect that the issue of bias 
should be raised before the same Tribunal at the earliest 
opportunity. The advertence of the time-limit of 15 days is 
nothing but a statutory incorporation of that idea. However, 
when the grounds enumerated in the Seventh Schedule 
occur or are brought to the notice of one party unless 
such party expressly waives its objections, it is ipso facto 
sufficient for that party, to say that the Tribunal’s mandate 
is automatically terminated. The party aggrieved then can 
go ahead and challenge the Tribunal’s continuation with 
the proceedings under Section 14.”
(Emphasis supplied)
108.	The Constitution Bench in CORE II (supra) affirmed the aforementioned 
decisions and reiterated that the ineligibility of a person to act as an 
arbitrator is a matter of law and goes to the root of the appointment. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
81
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
Thus, when an arbitrator is de jure unable to perform his function, 
his mandate would be automatically terminated under Section 14(1)
(a), and the parties would be within their rights to apply to the court 
under Section 14(2) for termination of the arbitrator’s mandate and 
appointment of a substituted arbitrator. 
b.	
Challenge to the ineligibility of the arbitrator after arbitral 
award has been passed 
109.	When an award has been passed, the proceedings before the 
arbitral tribunal conclude, leaving no possibility of substituting the 
arbitrator at this stage. In other words, once an award is passed, 
the mandate of the arbitral tribunal also arrives at a conclusion. In 
such circumstances, a party aggrieved by the arbitrator’s ineligibility 
may challenge the award by filing an application under Section 34 
of the 1996 Act, as an award passed by an ineligible arbitrator is 
nullity, non-est, or void ab initio, and against the public policy of India. 
110.	Even where an interim award has been passed, it is liable to be set 
aside, as it is not capable of being enforced. The fate of an interim 
award and that of an arbitral award, in this regard, is identical. In 
either circumstance, the parties would be required to initiate fresh 
arbitration proceedings as per law. In Alpro Industries v. Ambience 
(P) Ltd., reported in 2025 SCC OnLine Del 8373, the petitioner 
assailed an interim award under Section 34 on the primary ground 
of unilateral appointment. The Court observed thus:-
“41.⁠ ⁠In light of the findings in Mahavir Prasad (supra) and 
my findings that the unilateral appointment of the Sole 
Arbitrator in the present case is invalid and there has 
been no express waiver in writing in terms of the proviso 
to clause 12(5) of the Act, the Impugned Interim Award 
is liable to be set aside. Consequently, the issue raised 
by the respondents as to whether the Impugned Interim 
Award constitutes an ‘interim award’ or not would not be 
relevant. The Court cannot permit continuation of arbitral 
proceedings before an Arbitral Tribunal which would be a 
nullity and cannot result into an enforceable award. Hence, 
I do not deem it necessary to go into the merits of the 
challenge to the Impugned Interim Award.”
(Emphasis supplied)

82
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
111.	 An award passed by an arbitrator who is found to be ineligible cannot 
be enforced. In CORE II (supra), a Constitution Bench of this Court 
held that the concept of “public policy of India” and “fundamental 
policy of Indian law” means complying with statues and judicial 
precedents, and principles of natural justice. It was categorically held 
that “the most basic notions of morality and justice” mentioned in 
the Explanation 1 to Section 34(b) includes bias. The observations 
of this Court in paragraphs 163 and 164 respectively reproduced 
hereinbelow squarely apply to the facts of the present case. The 
relevant extract has been reproduced thus:-
“158. Section 34(2)(b) specifically provides that an arbitral 
award may be set aside if the court finds that the arbitral 
award conflicts with the public policy of India. The provision 
further clarifies “public policy of India” to only mean that 
: (i) the making of the award was induced or affected by 
fraud or corruption or was in violation of Section 75 or 
Section 81; (ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental 
policy of Indian law; or (iii) it is in conflict with the most 
basic notions of morality or justice.
159. This Court has construed the expression “public 
policy of India” appearing under Section 34 to mean the 
“fundamental policy of Indian law”. [Ssangyong Engg. & 
Construction Co. Ltd. v. NHAI, (2019) 15 SCC 131, para 
34 : (2020) 2 SCC (Civ) 213; NHAI v. P. Nagaraju, (2022) 
15 SCC 1 : (2024) 2 SCC (Civ) 414, para 39] The concept 
of “fundamental policy of Indian law” has been held to 
cover compliance with statutes and judicial precedents, 
adopting a judicial approach, and compliance with the 
principles of natural justice. [MMTC Ltd. v. Vedanta Ltd., 
(2019) 4 SCC 163, para 11 : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 293] In 
OPG Power Generation (India) (P) Ltd. v. Enexio Power 
Cooling Solutions (India) (P) Ltd. [OPG Power Generation 
(India) (P) Ltd. v. Enexio Power Cooling Solutions (India) 
(P) Ltd., (2025) 2 SCC 417 : (2025) 1 SCC (Civ) 54] , 
this Court explained the concept of “fundamental policy of 
Indian law” thus : (SCC pp. 467-68, paras 55-56)
“55. … The expression “in contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law” by use of the word 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
83
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
“fundamental” before the phrase “policy of Indian law” 
makes the expression narrower in its application than 
the phrase “in contravention with the policy of Indian 
law”, which means mere contravention of law is not 
enough to make an award vulnerable. To bring the 
contravention within the fold of fundamental policy 
of Indian law, the award must contravene all or any 
of such fundamental principles that provide a basis 
for administration of justice and enforcement of law 
in this country.
56. Without intending to exhaustively enumerate 
instances of such contravention, by way of illustration, 
it could be said that
(a) violation of the principles of natural justice;
(b) disregarding orders of superior courts in India 
or the binding effect of the judgment of a superior 
court; and
(c) violating law of India linked to public good or 
public interest, are considered contravention of the 
fundamental policy of Indian law.”
160. In Avitel Post Studioz Ltd. v. HSBC PI Holdings 
(Mauritius) Ltd. [Avitel Post Studioz Ltd. v. HSBC PI 
Holdings (Mauritius) Ltd., (2024) 7 SCC 197, para 34 : 
(2024) 3 SCC (Civ) 780] , this Court held that the most 
basic notions of morality and justice under the concept of 
“public policy” will include bias.
161. […] As a corollary, Section 34 places a responsibility on 
the Arbitral Tribunals to ensure that the arbitral proceedings 
are consistent with the fundamental policy of Indian law. 
[Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., (2021) 2 SCC 1, pp. 
69-70, para 70:“70. Arbitrators, like the courts, are equally 
bound to resolve and decide disputes in accordance with 
the public policy of the law. Possibility of failure to abide by 
public policy consideration in a legislation, which otherwise 
does not expressly or by necessary implication exclude 
arbitration, cannot form the basis to overwrite and nullify the 
arbitration agreement. This would be contrary to and defeat 

84
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the legislative intent reflected in the public policy objective 
behind the Arbitration Act. Arbitration has considerable 
advantages as it gives freedom to the parties to choose 
an arbitrator of their choice, and it is informal,flexible and 
quick. Simplicity, informality and expedition are hallmarks 
of arbitration. Arbitrators are required to be impartial and 
independent, adhere to natural justice, and follow a fair 
and just procedure. Arbitrators are normally experts in 
the subject and perform their tasks by referring to facts, 
evidence, and relevant case law.”]
xxx
163.  The possibility of bias is real in situations where 
an arbitration clause allows a government company to 
unilaterally appoint a sole arbitrator or control the majority 
of the arbitrators. Since the Government has control over 
the Arbitral Tribunal, it can chart the course of the arbitration 
proceedings to the prejudice of the other party. Resultantly, 
unilateral appointment clauses fail to provide an effective 
substitute for judicial proceedings in India. Further, a 
unilateral appointment clause is inherently exclusionary 
and violates the principle of equal treatment of parties 
and procedural equality.
164. Unilateral appointment clauses in a public-private 
contract fail to provide the minimum level of integrity 
required in authorities performing quasi-judicial functions 
such as Arbitral Tribunals. Therefore, a unilateral 
appointment clause is against the principle of arbitration, 
that is, impartial resolution of disputes between parties. 
It also violates the  nemo judex  rule which constitutes 
the public policy of India in the context of arbitration. 
Therefore, unilateral appointment clauses in public-private 
contracts are violative of Article 14 of the Constitution for 
being arbitrary in addition to being violative of the equality 
principle under the Arbitration Act.”
(Emphasis supplied)
112.	What emerges from the foregoing is that the appellants were well 
within their right to challenge the ineligibility of the sole arbitrator in 
an application under Section 34 of the Act, 1996.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
85
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
c.	
Challenge to the ineligibility of the arbitrator at any stage 
of the proceedings 
113.	A challenge to an arbitrator’s ineligibility could be raised at any stage 
because an award passed in such circumstance is non-est, i.e., it 
carries no enforceability or recognition in law. We say so because 
an arbitrator does not possess the jurisdiction to pass an award. In 
arbitration, the parties vest the jurisdiction in the tribunal by virtue of a 
valid arbitration agreement and an appointment made in accordance 
with the provisions of the Act, 1996. This jurisdiction is grounded in 
the consent of the parties as explained in the foregoing paragraphs 
of this judgment. 
114.	In this context, jurisdiction means the authority of an arbitral tribunal 
to render a decision affecting the merits of the case. An arbitrator 
who lacks jurisdiction cannot make an award on the merits. With a 
view to dispel any doubt and lend clarity, we deem it appropriate to 
observe that the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal is distinct from 
the admissibility of the dispute, i.e., the arbitrability of the claims. 
115.	A question pertaining to the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal arises 
when the tribunal is fundamentally incompetent to render any decision 
at all. In other words, a question of jurisdiction pertains to the ability 
of the tribunal to hear a case, whereas questions of admissibility 
presuppose that the tribunal has jurisdiction. An award passed by an 
arbitrator who does not have jurisdiction strikes at the very authority 
of the arbitrator. 
116.	This Court, in catena of decisions, has held that the validity of a 
decree can be challenged even in execution proceedings if the 
court passing such decree lacked subject-matter jurisdiction over 
the dispute. As a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction goes 
to the root of the matter. Any decision passed by a court lacking 
jurisdiction would be coram non judice, since a court cannot give 
itself jurisdiction. No act of the parties can cure an inherent lack 
of jurisdiction. 
117.	In Hira Lal Patni v. Kali Nath, reported in 1961 SCC OnLine SC 
42, this Court held that competence of a court to decide a case 
goes to the root of the matter, and incompetency results in inherent 
lack of jurisdiction. As a result, a decision rendered by a court that 
lacks jurisdiction is a nullity. The relevant observations read thus:- 

86
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“4. […] The validity of a decree can be challenged in 
execution proceedings only on the ground that the court 
which passed the decree was lacking in inherent jurisdiction 
in the sense that it could not have seisin of the case because 
the subject-matter was wholly foreign to its jurisdiction or 
that the defendant was dead at the time the suit had been 
instituted or decree passed, or some such other ground 
which could have the effect of rendering the court entirely 
lacking in jurisdiction in respect of the subject-matter of the 
suit or over the parties to it. But in the instant case there 
was no such inherent lack of jurisdiction. The decision 
of the Privy Council in the case of Ledgard v. Bull [13 
Indian Appeals 134] is an authority for the proposition 
that consent or waiver can cure defect of jurisdiction but 
cannot cure inherent lack of jurisdiction. In that case, the 
suit had been instituted in the Court of the Subordinate 
Judge, who was incompetent to try it. By consent of the 
parties, the case was transferred to the Court of the District 
Judge for convenience of trial. It was laid down by the 
Privy Council that as the court in which the suit had been 
originally instituted was entirely lacking in jurisdiction, in the 
sense that it was incompetent to try it, whatever happened 
subsequently was null and void because consent of parties 
could not operate to confer jurisdiction on a court which 
was incompetent to try the suit. […] It is well settled that the 
objection as to local jurisdiction of a court does not stand 
on the same footing as an objection to the competence 
of a court to try a case. Competence of a court to try a 
case goes to the very root of the jurisdiction, and where 
it is lacking, it is a case of inherent lack of jurisdiction. On 
the other hand, an objection as to the local jurisdiction of 
a court can be waived and this principle has been given 
a statutory recognition by enactments like Section 21 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure.[…]”
(Emphasis supplied)
118.	We may look into the decision of this Court in Hindustan Zinc 
Ltd.  v. Ajmer Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd., reported in (2019) 17 
SCC 82. The submission canvassed before this Court was that an 
objection to jurisdiction could not have been raised in a proceeding 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
87
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
under Section 37 of the Act, 1996, once the parties had consented 
to arbitration. In the said decision it was held that an objection to 
the inherent lack of jurisdiction can be taken at any stage and also 
in collateral proceedings. Furthermore, that a decree passed without 
jurisdiction is a nullity. The relevant observations read thus:- 
“17. We are of the view that it is settled law that if there is 
an inherent lack of jurisdiction, the plea can be taken up 
at any stage and also in collateral proceedings. This was 
held by this Court in Kiran Singh v. Chaman Paswan [Kiran 
Singh v. Chaman Paswan, (1955) 1 SCR 117 : AIR 1954 
SC 340] as follows : (SCR p. 121 : AIR p. 342, para 6)
“6. … It is a fundamental principle well-established that 
a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction is a 
nullity, and that its invalidity could be set up whenever 
and wherever it is sought to be enforced or relied 
upon, even at the stage of execution and even in 
collateral proceedings. A defect of jurisdiction, whether 
it is pecuniary or territorial, or whether it is in respect 
of the subject-matter of the action, strikes at the very 
authority of the Court to pass any decree, and such 
a defect cannot be cured even by consent of parties. 
If the question now under consideration fell to be 
determined only on the application of general principles 
governing the matter, there can be no doubt that the 
District Court of Monghyr was coram non judice, and 
that its judgment and decree would be nullities.”
18. Therefore, it is a little difficult to countenance Shri 
Vaidyanathan’s argument that having consented, the 
respondent cannot now turn around and challenge the 
very appointment of the arbitrator as being invalid and 
without jurisdiction.”
(Emphasis supplied)
119.	In Bhim Bahadur v. Vikram Singh, reported in 2015 SCC OnLine 
Utt 1563, when the issue before the High Court was whether the 
subject land therein was agricultural or abadi in nature. The Court 
held that the matter had to be referred to a revenue court under the 
Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act. The relevant 
observations read thus:- 

88
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“11.  In this regard, the law is well established to the 
effect that competency of the jurisdiction or the lack of 
the same in a particular Court cannot be determined by 
either of the parties through their pleadings, viz., the Court 
having jurisdiction under the law to decide a particular 
issue cannot be kept away from deciding the same on 
the basis of averments made by the parties and, in the 
same manner, the jurisdiction cannot be conferred on a 
particular Court on the basis of pleadings and admission 
thereof to decide a particular issue wherefor the law does 
not confer jurisdiction to the Court.”
(Emphasis supplied)
120.	All that we are trying to convey is that, in civil law, the law itself 
confers subject-matter jurisdiction on specific courts. For instance, a 
suit seeking a declaration on the validity of marriage before the Civil 
Court is not maintainable, as such disputes fall within the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the Family Court. Similarly, in arbitration, the consent of 
parties confers subject-matter jurisdiction, i.e., the authority to decide 
the dispute. When an arbitral tribunal is unilaterally constituted, such 
consent is absent, thereby divesting the tribunal of subject-matter 
jurisdiction. The Act, 1996, does not recognize the conferral of 
jurisdiction on an arbitral tribunal without the consent of the parties. 
By entering into an express agreement in writing as per the proviso 
to Section 12(5), the parties not only waive the ineligibility of the 
proposed arbitrator but also consent to his appointment. 
121.	Before we part, we deem it fit to observe that an arbitrator is better 
equipped with the position of law on appointments, more particularly, 
unilateral appointments. Therefore, it becomes incumbent upon the 
arbitrator that upon entering reference and at the very first hearing, 
to ensure from the parties that they are willing to participate in the 
proceedings and to insist upon a written agreement waiving the 
requirement of Section 12(5) of the Act, 1996. 
122.	Further, in such circumstances referred to above, if any party does 
not appear despite receipt of notice, the arbitrator shall not proceed 
further and shall immediately withdraw from the arbitral proceedings. 
The arbitrator must, along with the waiver agreement, record the 
minutes even when the parties are cooperating. This would certainly 
save time and avoid multiplicity of proceedings. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
89
Bhadra International (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v.  
Airports Authority of India
VIII.	 CONCLUSION
123.	A conspectus of the aforesaid detailed discussion on the position of 
law as regards Section 12 of the Act, 1996, is as follows:- 
i.	
The principle of equal treatment of parties provided in Section 
18 of the Act, 1996, applies not only to the arbitral proceedings 
but also to the procedure for appointment of arbitrators. Equal 
treatment of the parties entails that the parties must have an 
equal say in the constitution of the arbitral tribunal.  
ii.	
Sub-section (5) of Section 12 provides that any person whose 
relationship with the parties or counsel, or the dispute, whether 
direct or indirect, falls within any of the categories specified in 
the Seventh Schedule would be ineligible to be appointed as 
an arbitrator. Since, the ineligibility stems from the operation 
of law, not only is a person having an interest in the dispute or 
its outcome ineligible to act as an arbitrator, but appointment 
by such a person would be ex facie invalid. 
iii.	
The words “an express agreement in writing” in the proviso to 
Section 12(5) means that the right to object to the appointment 
of an ineligible arbitrator cannot be taken away by mere 
implication. The agreement referred to in the proviso must be 
a clear, unequivocal written agreement. 
iv.	
When an arbitrator is found to be ineligible by virtue of 
Section 12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule, his mandate is 
automatically terminated. In such circumstance, an aggrieved 
party may approach the court under Section 14 read with 
Section 15 for appointment of a substitute arbitrator. Whereas, 
when an award has been passed by such an arbitrator, an 
aggrieved party may approach the court under Section 34 for 
setting aside the award. 
v.	
In arbitration, the parties vest jurisdiction in the tribunal by 
exercising their consent in furtherance of a valid arbitration 
agreement. An arbitrator who lacks jurisdiction cannot make an 
award on the merits. Hence, an objection to the inherent lack 
of jurisdiction can be taken at any stage of the proceedings. 
124.	For all the foregoing reasons, we have reached the conclusion 
that the High Court committed an egregious error in passing the 

90
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
impugned judgment. We are left with no other option but to set 
aside the impugned judgment. As a result, the arbitral awards dated 
30.07.2018 passed by the sole arbitrator are also set aside. 
125.	It would be open to the parties to initiate fresh arbitration proceedings 
in accordance with law. 
126.	In the result, the appeals succeed and are hereby allowed. Pending 
applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
