[2026] 1 S.C.R. 91 : 2026 INSC 7
Nirbhay Singh Suliya
v.
State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
(Civil Appeal No. 40 of 2026)
05 January 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala* and K.V. Vishwanathan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether on facts, based on the four judicial orders of grant of bail 
per se and without anything more, the authorities were justified in 
removing the appellant-Judicial Officer from service.
Headnotes†
Judiciary – District judiciary – Departmental proceedings 
against Judicial Officer on the allegation that extraneous 
considerations actuated passing of bail orders – Mere wrong 
order or wrong exercise of discretion in grant of bail by itself 
without anything more, not a ground to initiate departmental 
proceedings against Judicial Officers – Complainant lodged 
complaint with the Chief Justice of the High Court inter alia 
alleging that the appellant-Additional District Judge was taking 
bribe through his steno for grant of bail in cases under the 
Excise Act in which the quantity of seized liquor was 50 Bulk 
liters or more – Appellant was removed from service after 
27 years of unblemished service solely on the basis of four 
judicial orders by which he enlarged certain parties therein 
on bail – Those four orders were contrasted with fourteen 
other orders of bail and after finding that in the four orders 
s.59-A, Madhya Pradesh Excise Act, 1915 was not referred to, 
it was held that it was proved that for corrupt motive or for 
some extraneous consideration bail applications were allowed 
contrary to s.59-A, Excise Act – Appellant filed writ petition 
before the High Court challenging the order of removal and 
the order of appellate authority and prayed for reinstatement 
with consequential benefits – Dismissed – Interference with:
Held: Only because an order is wrong or there is an error of 
judgment, without anything more, a judicial officer should not 
* Author

92
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
be put through the ordeal of a disciplinary proceeding or a 
prosecution – Merely because a different conclusion was possible 
is not an indicium for misconduct – Disciplinary Authority has to 
examine whether there has emerged from the record, one or more 
circumstances that indicate that the decision which forms the basis 
of the charge of misconduct was not an honest exercise of judicial 
power – Appellant was held guilty of misconduct only based on 
certain judicial orders granting bail without anything more – No 
material on record to show that there are circumstances from 
which inference could be drawn that extraneous considerations 
actuated the passing of those orders of bail – The hypothesis was 
drawn only on the basis that the order did not make reference 
to the statutory provision expressly – Moreover, a perusal of the 
four orders show that reasons were given, though there is no 
express mention s.59-A (2), Excise Act – The finding that in 14 
other orders he referred to s.59-A (2), Excise Act is by itself not 
enough to infer misconduct in the passing of the four bail orders in 
question – It will be a dangerous proposition to hold that judgments 
and orders which do not refer expressly to statutory provisions 
are per se dis-honest judgments – Findings in the inquiry report 
are perverse and not supported by the evidence on record – High 
Court erred in not interfering with the order – Order of removal, the 
order of Appellate Authority and the impugned order of the High 
Court set aside – Appellant shall be deemed to have continued 
in service till he attained the normal age of superannuation – 
Since the appellant has been kept out of service for no fault of 
his, full back wages with all consequential benefits be given to 
him – Per Pardiwala, J. [Concurring] Mere wrong order or wrong 
exercise of discretion in grant of bail by itself without anything 
more, cannot be a ground to initiate departmental proceedings. 
[Paras 29, 33, 35, 39, 40, 41, 43, 1]
Judiciary – District judiciary – Allegations against judicial 
officers – Duty of High Court – Note of caution:
Held: High Court which is vested with the supervisory control has 
to exercise great caution and circumspection – Only because an 
order is wrong or there is an error of judgment, without anything 
more, a judicial officer should not be put through the ordeal of a 
disciplinary proceeding or a prosecution – Merely because the order 
is wrong, disciplinary action is not warranted and each case will 
depend upon the facts and no absolute rule can be postulated – 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
93
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
Inference of misconduct or about extraneous considerations having 
actuated, the decision cannot be drawn merely from a hypothesis 
that a decision is erroneous – A wrong decision can yet be a bona 
fide error of judgment and inadvertence is consistent with an 
honest error of judgment – It is not the correctness of the verdict 
but the conduct of the Officer in question which is determinative – 
Per Pardiwala, J. [Concurring] High Court vested with the 
supervisory control must keep in mind that a judicial officer of the 
district judiciary works mostly in a charged atmosphere – A mere 
wrong order or wrong exercise of discretion in grant of bail by itself 
without anything more, cannot be a ground to initiate departmental 
proceedings. [Paras 32, 35, 1] 
Directions by Supreme Court – False and frivolous complaint 
against a judicial officer vis-à-vis complaints of misconduct 
against the judicial officer if prima facie found to be true – 
Course of action by High Courts:
Held: Strict and strong action in accordance with law should be 
taken against individuals filing a false and frivolous complaint 
against a judicial officer and/or if found to be engineering the 
false and frivolous complaints – Such proceedings would include 
in appropriate cases, proceedings for contempt of court – In case 
the person filing or engineering false and frivolous complaints is a 
recalcitrant member of the Bar, apart from proceedings for contempt 
of court, reference to the bar council should be made for disciplinary 
action – Bar councils, on receipt of such references, have to dispose 
of the matter expeditiously – Equally, if the complaint of misconduct 
against the judicial officer is prima facie found to be true, prompt 
action to initiate disciplinary proceeding should be taken and no 
leniency should be shown if the charges are established – In 
appropriate cases where criminal prosecution is warranted against 
a judicial officer, the High Court should not hesitate to have the 
same initiated – However, due care and caution must be exercised 
by the High Court in initiating such proceedings – Only because an 
order is wrong or there is an error of judgment, without anything 
more, a judicial officer should not be put through the ordeal of a 
disciplinary proceeding or a prosecution. [Paras 28, 29]
Justice delivery system – Judiciary – District judiciary – Bail – 
Exercise of discretion for grant of bail – Reluctance of trial 
court judges – Fear of initiation of departmental proceedings 
on mere suspicion:

94
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: Per Pardiwala, J. [Concurring] Initiation of departmental 
proceedings on mere suspicion is one of the primary causes 
why trial court judges are reluctant when it comes to exercising 
discretion for the purpose of grant of bail – It should not happen 
that because of the lurking fear in the mind of a trial court judge, 
of some administrative action being taken that even in a deserving 
case, well within the principles of law, bail is declined – This is 
one reason why the High Courts and the Supreme Court are 
flooded with bail applications – Courts of the district judiciary 
wield powers necessary for the functioning of the justice delivery 
system in India and when their autonomy is compromised by higher 
courts and fear takes precedence over judicial duties, democracy 
and the rule of law suffer – Over a period of time, the trial court 
judges have exhibited tendency to shirk from their solemn judicial 
function and responsibility when it comes to exercising discretion 
in matters relating to bail – Courts of the district judiciary wield 
powers necessary for the functioning of the justice delivery system 
in India and when their autonomy is compromised by higher courts 
and fear takes precedence over judicial duties, democracy and the 
rule of law suffer – For functioning of democracy, an independent 
judiciary to dispense justice without fear and favour is paramount. 
[Paras 2, 3]
Case Law Cited
Sadhna Chaudhary v. State of U.P and Another [2020] 4 SCR 
888 : (2020) 11 SCC 760; R.R. Parekh v. High Court of Gujarat 
and Another [2016] 5 SCR 906 : (2016) 14 SCC 1; Union of 
India and Others v. K.K. Dhawan [1993] 1 SCR 296 : (1993) 2 
SCC 56; P.C. Joshi v. State of U.P. and Others [2001] Supp. 1 
SCR 369 : (2001) 6 SCC 491; Ishwar Chand Jain v. High Court 
of Punjab and Haryana and Another [1988] Supp. 1 SCR 396 :
(1988) 3 SCC 370; Ramesh Chander Singh v. High Court of 
Allahabad and Another [2007] 3 SCR 198 : (2007) 4 SCC 247; 
Krishna Prasad Verma v. State of Bihar and Others [2019] 12 
SCR 861 : (2019) 10 SCC 640; Yoginath D. Bagde v. State of 
Maharashtra and Another [1999] Supp. 2 SCR 490 : (1999) 7 
SCC 739 – relied on.
Abhay Jain v. High Court of Rajasthan [2022] 16 SCR 693 : (2022) 
13 SCC 1 – referred to.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
95
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
List of Acts
Madhya Pradesh Excise Act, 1915; Contract Act, 1872.
List of Keywords
District judiciary; Disciplinary Inquiry against Judicial Officers; 
Disciplinary action against Judicial Officers; Departmental 
proceedings against Additional District & Sessions Judge; 
Disciplinary Inquiry against Additional District & Sessions Judge; 
Removal from service based on judicial orders granting bail; 
Findings in inquiry report perverse; Section 59-A, Madhya Pradesh 
Excise Act, 1915; Misconduct; Alleged extraneous considerations; 
Bail orders; Error of judgment; Wrong order; Wrong exercise of 
discretion in grant of bail; No ground to initiate departmental 
proceedings; Bona fide error of judgment; Seized liquor; 50 Bulk 
liters; Erroneous decision; Preliminary inquiry by District Judge; 
Unblemished service; Removal from service not justified; Bribe 
through steno for grant of bail; Independent judiciary; District 
judiciary; Bail; False and frivolous complaints against judicial 
officerss; Ill-conceived or motivated complaint against judicial 
officers; Complaint of misconduct against judicial officer if prima 
facie found to be true; Dishonest judgments; Reinstatement 
with consequential benefits; Fear of initiation of departmental 
proceedings; Trial court judges reluctant in exercising discretion 
for the purpose of grant of bail.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 40 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.07.2024 of the High 
Court of Madhya Pradesh Principal Seat at Jabalpur in WP No. 
8623 of 2016
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Dama Seshadri Nadu, Sr. Adv., Yash S. Vijay, Kanu Agarwal, 
Chetan Kanungo, Shikhar Aggarwal, Ms. Anisha Mahajan.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Harmeet Singh Ruprah, DAG, Arjun Garg, Ms. Sagun Srivastava, 
Ms. Arushi Kulshrestha, Saaransh Shukla, Ankit Rajgarhia, 
Ms. Muskan Bensla, Sarad Kumar Singhania, Shashank Shekhar, 
Meghraj Singh, Ratnesh Kumar.

96
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This case highlights the unfortunate plight of a judicial officer 
(appellant herein) who, after 27 years of unblemished service, was 
removed from service. The sole and exclusive basis on which the 
appellant has been removed are four judicial orders by which he 
enlarged certain parties thereon on bail. Those four orders were 
contrasted with fourteen other orders of bail and after finding that 
in the four orders Section 59-A of the Madhya Pradesh Excise Act, 
1915 (for short the “Excise Act”) was not referred to, action has been 
taken. According to the High Court, in the fourteen other orders the 
appellant referred to the said Section implying thereby that he was 
conscious of the existence of the said Section on the statute. Section 
59-A prescribes what has now famously come to be known as “twin 
conditions” for grant of bail.
3.	
The question before us is whether on facts, based on the four 
judicial orders of grant of bail per se and without anything more, 
the authorities were justified in removing the appellant from service? 
4.	
The facts lie in a very narrow compass. The appellant joined service 
on 31.10.1987 as Civil Judge (Junior Division) in the Madhya Pradesh 
Judicial Service. The appellant scaled the ladder up and in 2003 
was promoted as Additional District Judge and in September, 2008 
was confirmed in the said post. On 16.05.2011, he was transferred 
to Khargone, District Mandaleshwar (MP), where he joined as First 
Additional District & Sessions Judge. In the course of discharge of 
his duties, he dealt with several matters, including bail applications 
under the Excise Act.
5.	
One Jaipal Mehta, a resident of Jaitapur, Khargone, lodged a 
complaint with the Chief Justice of the Madhya Pradesh High Court, 
Jabalpur. The complaint which did not set out any details of the bail 
orders and which was in very general terms reads as under:-
“Subject: Regarding disposal of cases under Section 
34(2) of IPC.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
97
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
Sir,
In reference to above subject matter, it is requested that 
First ADJ Sh. Suliya posted in Khargone, District-West 
Nimar, Mandleshwar by taking bribe through his Steno 
namely Anil Joshi, Clerk, is granting bails in the cases of 
Section 34/2 of Excise Act i.e. of 50 Bulk Ltrs. of liquor, 
whereas, ADJ/Sessions Judge has no power to allow said 
bail applications. Said Bails are allowed by the High Court. 
Anil Joshi, Steno challenges in each and every case that 
either you bring case of 302, 307, Claim or Civil Case, I 
have good setting with sir, I will get it resolved, rest you 
have to pay money as per my wishes. Due to such corrupt 
employee, the judiciary is getting defamed. Injustice is 
being done with the aggrieved parties in place of giving 
them justice. Who will be responsible for it? Previously in 
the year 1995-196, the serious complaints of bribe were 
also made against the said corrupt employee, on which, 
no action was taken. Aforesaid employee is posted in 
Khargone since last 25 years and is earning money by 
doing setting with Advocates openly. If the enquiry of his 
account be conducted, then, the truth will be exposed. If, 
the trust of public loses confidence in judiciary then, will 
be possible of military rule jungle raj.”
6.	
It will be seen that according to the complaint, the allegation was 
that the appellant was taking bribe through his steno, namely, Anil 
Joshi for grant of bail in cases under the Excise Act in which the 
quantity of seized liquor was 50 Bulk liters or more; that the said 
Anil Joshi was claiming that he will get the work done through the 
appellant for extraneous consideration; that due to such corrupt 
employee, the judiciary was getting defamed; that even in 1995-96, 
serious complaints of bribery were made against the said employee 
on which no action was taken; that the said employee has been 
posted in Khargone for more than 25 years and is earning money 
through illegal means and that an inquiry is essential. 
7.	
It appears from the counter affidavit filed before this Court by R-2 - 
the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, that a preliminary inquiry was 
conducted by the District Judge (I & V), Indore Zone, Indore, against 
the appellant and on 06.10.2012, the Principal Registrar (I & V) put 

98
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
up a note based on which it was decided to initiate departmental 
proceedings against the appellant.
8.	
What emerges is that in the preliminary inquiry certain orders passed 
by the appellant in bail proceedings seem to have been examined 
and few orders pulled out. Two charges were framed against the 
appellant of which the second charge admittedly was held not proved 
by the inquiry officer. The charges read as under:-
“Whereas, you Shri Nirbhay Singh Suliya while functioning as 
Additional Sessions Judge, Khargone, distt. Mandleshwar, 
have committed following acts which if proved would 
amount to grave misconduct:-
ARTICLE OF CHARGE - I
That, you, with corrupt of oblique motive or for some 
extraneous considerations, while functioning as Additional 
& Sessions Judge, allowed Bail Application No. 129/11 
Lokesh Vs. State of MP vide order dated 1.8.11, Bail 
Application No. 136/11 Babulal & Ors. Vs. State vide order 
dated 4.8.11, Bail Application No.200/11 Mohan Vs. State 
of MP vide order dated 7.12.11, Bail Application No. 123/12 
Jitendra & Nantiya Vs. State & No. 122/12 Gulab & Ors. 
Vs. State of MP, vide order dated 31-08-12, against the 
provisions of Section 59-A of the M.P. Excise Act wherein 
all the cases, quantity of seized liquor was 50 and more 
bulk litres. On the contrary, you rejected Bail Application 
No.89/11 vide order dated 16.06.2011, Bail Application No. 
92/11, vide order dated 23.06.11, Bail Application No.104/11, 
vide order dated 1.7.2011, Bail Application No.103/11, vide 
order dated 4.7.11, Bail Application no. 111/11, vide order 
dated 11.7.11, Bail Application No. 121/11, vide order 
dated 21.07.11, Bail Application No.140/11, vide order 
dated 12.08.11, Bail Application No. 160/11 vide order 
dated 22.09.11 and six other bail applications in which the 
quantity of seized liquor was 50 bulk litres or more. In this 
manner you have applied double standard, malafidely, in 
allowing the aforesaid bail applications.
ARTICLE OF CHARGE - II
That, you, with corrupt or oblique motive or for some 
extraneous consideration allowed the first bail application 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
99
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
No. 101/2012 Pappu Vs. State of MP in Crime No. 101/2012 
under section 439 of CrPC for offense punishable under 
363, 366, 376(2)(g) of the IPC in a serious offence of gang 
rape without assigning any sufficient reason, whereas the 
accused was already facing trial in another similar crime no. 
103/2012 PS Oon for offence punishable under sections 
363, 366, 376(2)(g) 3 of the IPC.
Your aforesaid acts being unbecoming of Judicial Officer 
amount to grave misconduct under Rule 3 of M.P. Civil 
Services (Conduct) Rules, 1965 and are punishable under 
Rule 10 of the M.P. Civil Services (Classification, Control 
& Appeal) Rules, 1966.”
9.	
A perusal of “Charge-I” reveals that the orders in the following bail 
applications where Bail was granted to the applicants therein were 
the basis of the gravamen of the charge:-
Bail Application Nos.
Date of Order
129/2011
01.08.2011
136/2011
04.08.2011
200/2011
07.12.2011
123/2012 & 122/2012
31.08.2012
10.	 The charge was that for corrupt motive or that for some extraneous 
consideration, bail applications were allowed contrary to Section 
59-A of the Excise Act. A contrast was made with 14 other bail 
orders, where the appellant had rejected bail. It is significant to 
note that among the five bail orders, Bail Application No.200/2011 
that was disposed of on 07.12.2011 was actually a case where the 
appellant had rejected bail. Somehow that order also made its way 
into “Charge-I”, as an order of grant of bail. Be that as it may. In 
the list of witnesses, Jaipal Mehta was named apart from a general 
statement – “any other witnesses that may be felt necessary”.
11.	 The appellant gave his reply and dealt with each bail order that was 
subject matter of the charge.
12.	 We have perused the actual bail orders. In the bail order in Bail 
Application No.129/2011 (60 liters of liquor) the reasoning given 
was as under:-

100
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“After hearing arguments of both the parties, Criminal 
Case No.1685/11 Filed before Chief Judicial Magistrate 
was perused. On perusal, it is clear that on 25.07.2011, 
challan has been filed against both the Applicants/
Accused in violation of Section 34(2) of M.P. Excise Act, 
and possibility of consuming time in it’s trial cannot be 
overruled. In view of the nature of crime, allegations, and 
without commenting on the merits of evidences collected 
in the present case i.e. Crime No. 232/11, and by placing 
reliance on the said case laws, where trial is likely to take 
time, and Applicant/Accused are theirselves [sic] being 
permanent resident, there is no flight risk or tempering 
evidences on their part, thereupon, it appears justifiable to 
grant benefit of bail to these Applicants/ Accused Persons. 
Due to this reason, the present Bail Application u/s 439 
Cr.P.C. is hereby allowed.”
13.	 Similarly, in other orders, reasons like filing of challan, the applicants 
being rural farmers with no flight risk were mentioned. There was 
no express reference to the twin conditions under Section 59-A(2) 
of the Excise Act.
14.	 At the inquiry, the complainant Jaipal Mehta was not examined. 
Instead the executive clerk of ADJ, Khargone Court, Gendalal 
Chauhan was examined as witness No.1, in support of the charge. 
The witness marked all the exhibits and categorically deposed as 
under which actually was in favour of the appellant :-
“It is correct to say that while passing orders, Anil Joshi 
was posted as Steno in the Court of First Additional 
Sessions Judge. He is posted in Khargone since last 7-8 
years, whom I know due to being my colleague. I never 
seen Anil (sic) asking anyone that he has good relations 
with Suliya Sahab and I will get done the work by doing 
setting. None of the Advocates has told me that Anil Joshi 
has setting with Suliya Sahab.”
15.	 The appellant in defense examined the prosecutor K.P. Tripathi who 
appeared in all the 18 bail applications which were subject matter 
of the charge. He deposed as under:-
“I did not feel that the double standard has been adopted by 
the Court. If it would happen, then, I would give my opinion 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
101
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
to the State for taking action in Hon’ble High Court. In Exh. 
P-19, only one Crime i.e. Crime No.102/12 is registered 
against Accused Pappu in P.S. Oon. Moreover, as per 
my knowledge, no other crime is registered against this 
accused. Because in Police Report, there is no mention 
of registration of any other crime against him. I find the 
functioning of Court to be completely impartial.”
……
“That, three Bail Applications of Excise Act have been 
allowed, and out of the said Applications, 15 Applications 
have been rejected. In my opinion, in the cases of Bail 
marked as Exh. P-1, P-2 and P-4, those orders of allowing 
bail application which have been passed in view of the facts 
and circumstances of respective cases, nature of crime, 
and in pursuance of the case laws of Hon’ble High Court 
and Supreme Court, those orders are completely based 
on merits and are relevant and true as per law. Those 15 
Bail Applications which have been rejected by the Ld. Trial 
Court, out of those cases, in the orders marked as Exh. 
P-9, Exh. P-12, Exh. P-13, Exh. P-17 and Exh. P-18, the 
case was at the initial stage of investigation.”
……
“Note: Question by Enquiry Officer:-
Question: The bail orders, in which bail applications have 
been allowed, whether those orders according to your 
goodself or in the opinion of Public Prosecutor, are proper 
or improper? What you say in this regard.
Answer: In my opinion i.e. in the capacity of Public 
Prosecutor, the orders of granting bail were absolutely 
proper and on proper grounds.”
16.	 Notwithstanding the above evidence the inquiry officer held “Charge-I”, 
proved by recording the following findings:-
“Therefore, on the basis of aforesaid analysis, as a final 
conclusion, it is proved in favour of the Department that 
Delinquent Officer Sh. N.S. Suliya in the capacity of 
Additional Sessions Judge, not being impartial in the 

102
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
disposal of Bail Applications for the offences of Section 
34(2), 49-A of the Excise Act, and with oblique motive 
and by deliberately violating the mandatory provisions 
of Section 59-A of the aforesaid Act, has committed 
misconduct by allowing some Bail Application Nos. 
129/11, 136/11, 123/12, 122/12 and by rejecting some 
bail Applications by applying double standards in malafide 
and arbitrary manner, who has violated Rule 3 of the M.P. 
Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 196, which is punishable 
under Rule 10 of the M.P. Civil Services (Classification, 
Control & Appeal) Rules, 1966.”
17.	 On 21.03.2014, a copy of the inquiry report was furnished to the 
appellant and he was asked to show cause on the punishment. The 
appellant filed a detailed reply by his letter dated 10.04.2014.
18.	 On 02.09.2014, on the recommendation of the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh, order was passed by the Principal Secretary, Government 
of M.P., Law & Legislative Affairs Department, removing the appellant 
from service. A representation/appeal filed against the said order 
was rejected on 17.03.2016.
19.	 The appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh at Jabalpur (Writ Petition No.8623/2016) challenging the 
order of removal and the order of the appellate authority and prayed 
for reinstatement with consequential benefits.
20.	 By the impugned order dated 25.07.2024, the High Court has 
dismissed the Writ Petition by recording the following finding:-
“If the principles laid down by the Supreme Court, in the 
case referred to herein above, are taken note of, then a 
reasonable finding arrived at by the Inquiring Authority in 
the present case based on material available on record 
can neither be interfered with by this Court nor can it 
termed as perverse or unreasonable to such an extent 
that interference can be made by this Court.
Considering the material available in the present case, 
it is apparent that the petitioner was holding the post 
of Additional Sessions Judge with which comes a great 
responsibility and he was under obligation to conduct 
himself in a manner befitting the post held by him. He was 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
103
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
under duty to conduct the proceedings of bail applications 
in conformity with the provisions of law. He extended 
the benefit of bail to some applicants relying on the 
pronouncement of High Court and refused to grant bail 
to others without considering those pronouncements. No 
violation of principles of natural justice or error is found in 
the procedure followed in the enquiry in the present case. 
In the absence of any procedural illegality, irregularity in 
the conduct of departmental enquiry, in the considered 
opinion of this Court, no interference is warranted and after 
considering the over all material available in the record 
and in view of the settled position of law, we do not find 
any reason to interfere in the order of punishment/removal 
dated 02.09.2014 and the order of rejection of appeal on 
17.03.2016 and accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.”
21.	 Aggrieved, the appellant is before us.
22.	 We have heard Mr. Dama Seshadri Naidu, learned senior counsel 
assisted by Mr. Kanu Agarwal, learned counsel for the appellant 
and Mr. Arjun Garg, learned counsel for the respondent no. 2, the 
High Court of Madhya Pradesh, who ably presented the case of the 
said respondent. We have perused the records, including the written 
submissions and the compilation of case law filed by the parties.
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANT: -
23.	 Learned senior counsel for the appellant contends that the allegations 
were directly against Anil Joshi – the Stenographer; that neither the 
complainant – Jaipal Mehta nor the Stenographer was produced as 
witnesses during the Departmental Inquiry and that the bail orders 
which were subject matter of the inquiry were passed on valid 
grounds. Even in the case of special statute “bail is the rule and jail 
is the exception”; that the Inquiry Officer has examined the legality 
and propriety of the orders of bail acting as an Appellate Authority. 
That the departmental witness Gendalal Chauhan and the public 
prosecutor in their deposition did not support the charge and finally 
it was contended that merely because on a given set of facts, a 
different conclusion is possible, is no ground to indict a Judicial 
Officer. It was further submitted that wrong exercise of jurisdiction 
or mistake of law or wrong interpretation of law cannot be the basis 
for initiating disciplinary proceedings. 

104
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
CONTENTIONS OF RESPONDENT NO.2 – THE HIGH COURT OF 
MADHYA PRADESH:-
24.	 The learned Counsel for the respondent no. 2 - the High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh submitted that the procedure for Inquiry has been 
duly followed; that the consistent view of this Court has been that the 
Court will not function as an Appellate Court over the Inquiry report 
and the only consideration was whether the Inquiry had been fairly 
conducted after giving due opportunity to the delinquent. It was further 
submitted that Section 59-A (2) of the Excise Act was not even referred 
to in the bail orders in question, while in the other bail orders it was 
mentioned while rejecting bail. The learned counsel submitted that 
the Inquiry Officer has come to the conclusion that the conduct of the 
appellant was not impartial and the appellant violated the mandate 
of Section 59-A and applied double standards in a mala fide and 
arbitrary manner. It was submitted that a judicial officer is required to 
maintain a very high standard of devotion to duty. So contending, it 
was pleaded that the impugned order did not call for any interference.
QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION: -
25.	 The questions for consideration are whether the order removing the 
appellant from service based on the inquiry report is justified in law 
and whether any good ground has been made out for interference?
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION: -
26.	 The present is the case of a Disciplinary Inquiry against the senior 
Judicial Officer. Before we set out the parameters laid down by this 
Court as to in what circumstances a Judicial Officer can be subjected 
to penalty in the discharge of his duties, it is apposite to make certain 
preliminary observations. 
27.	 A fearless judge is the bedrock of an independent judiciary, as 
much as an independent judiciary itself is the foundation on which 
rule of law rests. A judicial Officer is tasked with the onerous duty 
of deciding cases. Invariably one party to the case would lose and 
go back unhappy. Disgruntled elements amongst them, wanting 
to settle scores may raise frivolous allegations. The Trial Judiciary 
also has tremendous work pressure and works under trying working 
conditions. Large number of cases are listed in a day and most of the 
Judicial Officers give their very best while discharging their duties.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
105
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
28.	 Instances have also emerged from different parts of the country, where 
not just disgruntled parties but some mischievous elements in the Bar 
have also resorted to intimidatory tactics against the members of the 
Trial Judiciary by engineering false and anonymous complaints. Strict 
and strong action in accordance with law should be taken against such 
individuals filing a false and frivolous complaint against a judicial officer 
and/or if found to be engineering the false and frivolous complaints. 
Such proceedings would include in appropriate cases, proceedings 
for contempt of court. In case the person filing or engineering false 
and frivolous complaints is a recalcitrant member of the Bar, apart 
from proceedings for contempt of court, reference to the bar council 
should be made for disciplinary action. Bar councils, on receipt of 
such references, have to dispose of the matter expeditiously.
29.	 Equally, if the complaint of misconduct against the judicial officer 
is prima facie found to be true, prompt action to initiate disciplinary 
proceeding should be taken and no leniency should be shown if 
the charges are established. Not only this, in appropriate cases 
where criminal prosecution is warranted against a judicial officer, 
the High Court should not hesitate to have the same initiated. That 
is the only way to weed out black-sheeps sullying the fair name of 
the judiciary. Due care and caution must be exercised by the High 
Court in initiating such proceedings. It should be ensured that only 
because an order is wrong or there is an error of judgment, without 
anything more, a judicial officer is not put through the ordeal of a 
disciplinary proceeding or a prosecution.
30.	 It is trite to recall the observations of this Court in Sadhna 
Chaudhary v. State of U.P and Another.1:-
“20. We are also not oblivious to the fact that mere suspicion 
cannot constitute “misconduct”. Any “probability” of 
misconduct needs to be supported with oral or documentary 
material, even though, the standard of proof would obviously 
not be on a par with that in a criminal trial. While applying 
these yardsticks, the High Court is expected to consider the 
existence of differing standards and approaches amongst 
different Judges. There are innumerable instances of 
judicial officers who are liberal in granting bail, awarding 
1	
(2020) 11 SCC 760

106
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
compensation under MACT or for acquired land, back 
wages to workmen or mandatory compensation in other 
cases of tortious liabilities. Such relief-oriented judicial 
approaches cannot by themselves be grounds to cast 
aspersions on the honesty and integrity of an officer.
21. Furthermore, one cannot overlook the reality of ours 
being a country, wherein countless complainants are 
readily available without hesitation to tarnish the image 
of the judiciary, often for mere pennies or even cheap 
momentary popularity. Sometimes, a few disgruntled 
members of the Bar also join hands with them, and 
the officers of the subordinate judiciary are usually 
the easiest target. It is, therefore, the duty of the High 
Courts to extend their protective umbrella and ensure 
that the upright and straightforward judicial officers 
are not subjected to unmerited onslaught.
26. We can find no fault in the proposition that the end 
result of adjudication does not matter, and only whether 
the delinquent officer had taken illegal gratification 
(monetary or otherwise) or had been swayed by 
extraneous considerations while conducting the 
process is of relevance. Indeed, many-a-times it is 
possible that a judicial officer can indulge in conduct 
unbecoming of his office whilst at the same time giving 
an order, the result of which is legally sound. Such 
unbecoming conduct can either be in the form of a 
Judge taking a case out of turn, delaying hearings 
through adjournments, seeking bribes to give parties 
their legal dues, etc. None of these necessarily need to 
affect the outcome. However, importantly in the present 
case, a perusal of the charge-sheet shows that no such 
allegation of the process having been vitiated has been 
made against the appellant.”
(Emphasis supplied)
31.	 In Abhay Jain vs. High Court of Rajasthan2, this Court quoted with 
approval the observations in Sadhna Chaudhary (supra).
2	
(2022) 13 SCC 1

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
107
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
32.	 When false allegations fly thick and fast, the judicial officers cannot 
react. Here is where the High Court which is vested with the supervisory 
control has to exercise great caution and circumspection. As to what 
the parameters are, when the High Court on the Administrative side 
is faced with such a scenario, has been felicitously set out by Chief 
Justice D.Y. Chandrachud J. speaking for the Court in R.R. Parekh v. 
High Court of Gujarat and Another3 as under: - 
“16. The issue of whether a judicial officer has been 
actuated by an oblique motive or corrupt practice has to 
be determined upon a careful appraisal of the material on 
the record. Direct evidence of corruption may not always 
be forthcoming in every case involving a misconduct of 
this nature. A wanton breach of the governing principles of 
law or procedure may well be indicative in a given case of 
a motivated, if not reckless disregard of legal principle. In 
the absence of a cogent explanation to the contrary, it is 
for the disciplinary authority to determine whether a pattern 
has emerged on the basis of which an inference that the 
judicial officer was actuated by extraneous considerations 
can be drawn. Cases involving misdemeanours of a judicial 
officer have to be dealt with sensitivity and care. A robust 
common sense must guide the disciplinary authority. At one 
end of the spectrum are those cases where direct evidence 
of a misdemeanour is available. Evidence in regard to 
the existence of an incriminating trail must be carefully 
scrutinised to determine whether an act of misconduct is 
established on the basis of legally acceptable evidence. Yet 
in other cases, direct evidence of a decision being actuated 
by a corrupt motive may not be available. The issue which 
arises in such cases is whether there are circumstances 
from which an inference that extraneous considerations 
have actuated a judicial officer can legitimately be drawn. 
Such an inference cannot obviously be drawn merely 
from a hypothesis that a decision is erroneous. A wrong 
decision can yet be a bona fide error of judgment. 
Inadvertence is consistent with an honest error of 
3	
(2016) 14 SCC 1

108
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
judgment. A charge of misconduct against a judicial 
officer must be distinguished from a purely erroneous 
decision whether on law or on fact. The legality of a 
judicial determination is subject to such remedies 
as are provided in law for testing the correctness 
of the determination. It is not the correctness of the 
verdict but the conduct of the officer which is in 
question. The disciplinary authority has to determine 
whether there has emerged from the record one or 
more circumstances that indicate that the decision 
which forms the basis of the charge of misconduct 
was not an honest exercise of judicial power. The 
circumstances let into evidence to establish misconduct 
have to be sifted and evaluated with caution. The threat of 
disciplinary proceedings must not demotivate the honest 
and independent officer. Yet on the other hand, there is a 
vital element of accountability to society involved in dealing 
with cases of misconduct. There is on the one hand a 
genuine public interest in protecting fearless and honest 
officers of the District Judiciary from motivated criticism 
and attack. Equally there is a genuine public interest in 
holding a person who is guilty of wrongdoing, responsible 
for his or her actions. Neither aspect of public interest 
can be ignored. Both are vital to the preservation of the 
integrity of the administration of justice.”
(Emphasis supplied)
33.	 As held in R.R. Parekh (supra), it should be borne-in-mind that 
inference of misconduct or about extraneous considerations having 
actuated, the decision cannot be drawn merely from a hypothesis that 
a decision is erroneous. It has been held that a wrong decision can yet 
be a bona fide error of judgment and inadvertence is consistent with 
an honest error of judgment. Ultimately, it is not the correctness of the 
verdict but the conduct of the Officer in question which is determinative. 
34.	 It is apposite to recall the observations of this Court in Union of 
India and Others vs. K.K. Dhawan4, which has been followed in 
4	
(1993) 2 SCC 56

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
109
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
P.C. Joshi v. State of U.P. and Others5. This Court in K.K. Dhawan 
(supra), while illustrating certain cases for which disciplinary action 
can be initiated, took care to administer a note of caution also. In 
K.K. Dhawan (supra), this Court held:-
“28. Certainly, therefore, the officer who exercises judicial 
or quasi-judicial powers acts negligently or recklessly or in 
order to confer undue favour on a person is not acting as 
a Judge. Accordingly, the contention of the respondent has 
to be rejected. It is important to bear in mind that in the 
present case, we are not concerned with the correctness or 
legality of the decision of the respondent but the conduct of 
the respondent in discharge of his duties as an officer. The 
legality of the orders with reference to the nine assessments 
may be questioned in appeal or revision under the Act. 
But we have no doubt in our mind that the Government 
is not precluded from taking the disciplinary action for 
violation of the Conduct Rules. Thus, we conclude that 
the disciplinary action can be taken in the following cases:
(i) Where the officer had acted in a manner as would 
reflect on his reputation for integrity or good faith or 
devotion to duty;
(ii) if there is prima facie material to show recklessness 
or misconduct in the discharge of his duty;
(iii) if he has acted in a manner which is unbecoming 
of a Government servant;
(iv) if he had acted negligently or that he omitted 
the prescribed conditions which are essential for the 
exercise of the statutory powers;
(v) if he had acted in order to unduly favour a party;
(vi) if he had been actuated by corrupt motive, 
however small the bribe may be because Lord Coke 
said long ago “though the bribe may be small, yet 
the fault is great”.
29. The instances above catalogued are not exhaustive. 
However, we may add that for a mere technical violation 
5	
(2001) 6 SCC 491

110
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
or merely because the order is wrong and the action not 
falling under the above enumerated instances, disciplinary 
action is not warranted. Here, we may utter a word of 
caution. Each case will depend upon the facts and no 
absolute rule can be postulated.”
35.	 This Court held that merely because the order is wrong, disciplinary 
action is not warranted and that each case will depend upon the 
facts and no absolute rule can be postulated. What is significant to 
notice is that even though in the illustrated case [para 28 (iv)] K.K. 
Dhawan (supra), cases of omission of prescribed conditions which 
are essential for the exercise of statutory powers may in a given 
case furnish a ground for disciplinary enquiry, it is not an absolute 
rule and each case will depend upon the facts. As observed in R.R. 
Parekh (supra), the Disciplinary Authority has to examine whether 
there has emerged from the record, one or more circumstances 
that indicate that the decision which forms the basis of the charge 
of misconduct was not an honest exercise of judicial power. 
36.	 In Ishwar Chand Jain v. High Court of Punjab and Haryana and 
Another6, this Court highlighted how the functioning of the Trial 
Judiciary would be seriously impacted and fearless discharge of duties 
would become a casualty, if inquiries are launched on ill-conceived 
or motivated complaints. This Court in Ishwar Chand Jain (supra) 
held as under:- 
“14. Under the Constitution the High Court has control 
over the subordinate judiciary. While exercising that 
control it is under a constitutional obligation to guide 
and protect judicial officers. An honest strict judicial 
officer is likely to have adversaries in the mofussil 
courts. If complaints are entertained on trifling matters 
relating to judicial orders which may have been upheld 
by the High Court on the judicial side no judicial officer 
would feel protected and it would be difficult for him 
to discharge his duties in an honest and independent 
manner. An independent and honest judiciary is a sine 
qua non for rule of law. If judicial officers are under 
constant threat of complaint and enquiry on trifling 
6	
(1988) 3 SCC 370

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
111
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
matters and if High Court encourages anonymous 
complaints to hold the field the subordinate judiciary 
will not be able to administer justice in an independent 
and honest manner. It is therefore imperative that 
the High Court should also take steps to protect its 
honest officers by ignoring ill-conceived or motivated 
complaints made by the unscrupulous lawyers and 
litigants. Having regard to facts and circumstances of 
the instant case we have no doubt in our mind that the 
resolution passed by the Bar Association against the 
appellant was wholly unjustified and the complaints made 
by Shri Mehlawat and others were motivated which did 
not deserve any credit. Even the vigilance Judge after 
holding enquiry did not record any finding that the appellant 
was guilty of any corrupt motive or that he had not acted 
judicially. All that was said against him was that he had 
acted improperly in granting adjournments.”
[Emphasis supplied]
37.	 Similar sentiments were expressed in Ramesh Chander Singh v. 
High Court of Allahabad and Another7, wherein this Court held 
as under:- 
“12. This Court on several occasions has disapproved 
the practice of initiation of disciplinary proceedings 
against officers of the subordinate judiciary merely 
because the judgments/orders passed by them are 
wrong. The appellate and revisional courts have 
been established and given powers to set aside such 
orders. The higher courts after hearing the appeal 
may modify or set aside erroneous judgments of the 
lower courts. While taking disciplinary action based 
on judicial orders, the High Court must take extra 
care and caution.
17. In Zunjarrao Bhikaji Nagarkar v. Union of India 
[(1999) 7 SCC 409 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 1299 : AIR 1999 
SC 2881] this Court held that wrong exercise of 
jurisdiction by a quasi-judicial authority or mistake 
7	
(2007) 4 SCC 247

112
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of law or wrong interpretation of law cannot be the 
basis for initiating disciplinary proceeding. Of course, 
if the judicial officer conducted in a manner as would 
reflect on his reputation or integrity or good faith or 
there is a prima facie material to show recklessness 
or misconduct in discharge of his duties or he had 
acted in a manner to unduly favour a party or had 
passed an order actuated by corrupt motive, the High 
Court by virtue of its power under Article 235 of the 
Constitution may exercise its supervisory jurisdiction. 
Nevertheless, under such circumstances it should 
be kept in mind that the Judges at all levels have to 
administer justice without fear or favour. Fearlessness 
and maintenance of judicial independence are very 
essential for an efficacious judicial system. Making 
adverse comments against subordinate judicial 
officers and subjecting them to severe disciplinary 
proceedings would ultimately harm the judicial system 
at the grassroot level.”
38.	 Highlighting various options available before the High Court to deal 
with judicial officers and the need for clearly establishing misconduct 
and extraneous influences or illegal gratification before resorting to 
disciplinary measures, this Court in Krishna Prasad Verma v. State 
of Bihar and Others8, had the following to say:- 
“16. We would, however, like to make it clear that we are 
in no manner indicating that if a judicial officer passes a 
wrong order, then no action is to be taken. In case a judicial 
officer passes orders which are against settled legal norms 
but there is no allegation of any extraneous influences 
leading to the passing of such orders then the appropriate 
action which the High Court should take is to record such 
material on the administrative side and place it on the 
service record of the judicial officer concerned. These 
matters can be taken into consideration while considering 
career progression of the judicial officer concerned. Once 
note of the wrong order is taken and they form part of the 
service record these can be taken into consideration to 
8	
(2019) 10 SCC 640

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
113
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
deny selection grade, promotion, etc., and in case there is 
a continuous flow of wrong or illegal orders then the proper 
action would be to compulsorily retire the judicial officer, 
in accordance with the Rules. We again reiterate that 
unless there are clear-cut allegations of misconduct, 
extraneous influences, gratification of any kind, etc., 
disciplinary proceedings should not be initiated merely 
on the basis that a wrong order has been passed by 
the judicial officer or merely on the ground that the 
judicial order is incorrect.”
[Emphasis supplied]
39.	 That merely because a different conclusion was possible is not an 
indicium for misconduct was highlighted in P.C. Joshi (supra).
“7. In the present case, though elaborate enquiry has been 
conducted by the enquiry officer, there is hardly any material 
worth the name forthcoming except to scrutinize each one 
of the orders made by the appellant on the judicial side to 
arrive at a different conclusion. That there was possibility 
on a given set of facts to arrive at a different conclusion 
is no ground to indict a judicial officer for taking one view 
and that too for alleged misconduct for that reason alone. 
The enquiry officer has not found any other material, 
which would reflect on his reputation or integrity or 
good faith or devotion to duty or that he has been 
actuated by any corrupt motive. At best, he may say 
that the view taken by the appellant is not proper or 
correct and not attribute any motive to him which 
is for extraneous consideration that he had acted 
in that manner. If in every case where an order of a 
subordinate court is found to be faulty a disciplinary 
action were to be initiated, the confidence of the 
subordinate judiciary will be shaken and the officers 
will be in constant fear of writing a judgment so as 
not to face a disciplinary enquiry and thus judicial 
officers cannot act independently or fearlessly. Indeed 
the words of caution are given in K.K. Dhawan case 
[(1993) 2 SCC 56 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 325 : (1993) 24 ATC 
1] and A.N. Saxena case [(1992) 3 SCC 124 : 1992 SCC 
(L&S) 861 : (1992) 21 ATC 670] that merely because the 

114
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
order is wrong or the action taken could have been 
different does not warrant initiation of disciplinary 
proceedings against the judicial officer. In spite of 
such caution, it is unfortunate that the High Court has 
chosen to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the 
appellant in this case.”
40.	 Applying the above principles to the facts of the present case, we 
find that the appellant has been held guilty of misconduct only based 
on certain judicial orders granting bail without anything more. We 
say so for the following reasons:-
(i)	
The complaint, as originally filed by Jaipal Mehta, was primarily 
against Anil Joshi, the stenographer who has been working in 
Khargone for a long time even before the appellant assumed 
office in Khargone. 
(ii)	
The complaint neither set out any particulars nor set out any 
judicial order. It was general in nature.
(iii)	 The complainant was not examined in the inquiry. The witnesses 
examined in support of the charge Gendalal Chauhan did not 
support the charge.
(iv)	 The prosecutor who appeared in each of the 18 bail orders was 
examined on behalf of the defence and even he deposed that 
the State accepted the orders granting bail without mounting 
any challenge in the higher court. He categorically deposed 
that the orders were absolutely proper and were passed on 
proper grounds.
(v)	
A perusal of the four orders show that reasons have been 
given, though there is no express mention Section 59-A (2) of 
the Excise Act. In one bail order, the appellant mentions about 
the filing of the challan and the possibility of the trial consuming 
lot of time. In fact, in the said order, the appellant has relied on 
Article 21 though he has not expressly mentioned the same. In 
the other bail orders, he mentions about the applicants being 
rural farmers and not being a flight risk and so on.
(vi)	 There is absolutely no material placed on record to show that 
there are circumstances from which inference could be drawn that 
extraneous considerations actuated the passing of those orders 
of bail. The hypothesis was drawn only on the basis that the 
order did not make reference to the statutory provision expressly.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
115
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
(vii)	 The finding that in 14 other orders he referred to Section 59-A 
(2) of the Excise Act is by itself not enough to infer misconduct 
in the passing of the four bail orders in question.
(viii)	 It will be a dangerous proposition to hold that judgments and 
orders which do not refer expressly to statutory provisions are 
per se dis-honest judgments.
41.	 The High Court has erred in not interfering with the order. A valiant 
attempt was made by Mr. Arjun Garg to sustain the impugned order by 
contending that a writ court or this Court cannot act as an appellate 
court over the inquiry report and the only consideration was whether 
the inquiry had been fairly conducted. We are unable to accept the 
said contention. In our opinion, for the reasons stated above, the 
findings in the inquiry report are perverse and are not supported by 
the evidence on record.# We make bold to record a finding that on 
the available material, no reasonable person would have reached 
the conclusion that enquiry officer reached. 
42.	 In Yoginath D. Bagde v. State of Maharashtra and Another9, 
Saghir Ahmad, J. lucidly explained the principle thus:-
“51. It was lastly contended by Mr Harish N. Salve that 
this Court cannot reappraise the evidence which has 
already been scrutinised by the enquiry officer as also by 
the Disciplinary Committee. It is contended that the High 
Court or this Court cannot, in exercise of its jurisdiction 
under Article 226 or Article 32 of the Constitution, act as 
the appellate authority in the domestic enquiry or trial and 
it is not open to this Court to reappraise the evidence. The 
proposition as put forward by Mr Salve is in very broad 
terms and cannot be accepted. The law is well settled 
that if the findings are perverse and are not supported 
by evidence on record or the findings recorded at the 
domestic trial are such to which no reasonable person 
would have reached, it would be open to the High 
Court as also to this Court to interfere in the matter. In 
Kuldeep Singh v. Commr. of Police [(1999) 2 SCC 10 : 
1999 SCC (L&S) 429 : JT (1998) 8 SC 603] this Court, 
9	
(1999) 7 SCC 739
# Ed. Note: “supported by the evidence on record” instead of “supported by findings on record” in terms of 
subsequent corrigendum.

116
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
relying upon the earlier decisions in Nand Kishore 
Prasad v. State of Bihar [(1978) 3 SCC 366 : 1978 SCC 
(L&S) 458 : AIR 1978 SC 1277 : (1978) 3 SCR 708] , 
State of Andhra Pradesh v. Rama Rao [AIR 1963 SC 
1723 : (1964) 3 SCR 25] , Central Bank of India Ltd. v. 
Prakash Chand Jain [AIR 1969 SC 983 : (1969) 2 LLJ 
377] , Bharat Iron Works v. Bhagubhai Balubhai Patel 
[(1976) 1 SCC 518 : 1976 SCC (L&S) 92 : AIR 1976 
SC 98 : (1976) 2 SCR 280] as also Rajinder Kumar 
Kindra v. Delhi Admn. [(1984) 4 SCC 635 : 1985 SCC 
(L&S) 131 : AIR 1984 SC 1805 : (1985) 1 SCR 866] laid 
down that although the court cannot sit in appeal over 
the findings recorded by the disciplinary authority 
or the enquiry officer in a departmental enquiry, it 
does not mean that in no circumstance can the court 
interfere. It was observed that the power of judicial 
review available to a High Court as also to this Court 
under the Constitution takes in its stride the domestic 
enquiry as well and the courts can interfere with the 
conclusions reached therein if there was no evidence 
to support the findings or the findings recorded were 
such as could not have been reached by an ordinary 
prudent man or the findings were perverse.”
(Emphasis supplied)
43.	 For the above reasons, the appeal is allowed. The order of removal 
dated 02.09.2015, the order of Appellate Authority dated 17.03.2016 
and the impugned order of the High Court are all set aside. The 
appellant shall be deemed to have continued in service till he attained 
the normal age of superannuation. Since the appellant has been 
kept out of service for no fault of his, we are of the opinion that full 
back wages with all consequential benefits should be given to the 
appellant. Let the monetary benefits be released within a period of 
eight weeks from today with interest @ 6 per cent. No order as to 
costs.
44.	 Let a copy of this judgment be transmitted to all the Registrar 
Generals of the respective High Courts in the country, so as to 
enable them to draw the attention of the Chief Justices of the High 
Courts to the same.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
117
Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
1.	
My esteemed brother Justice K.V. Viswanathan has penned an ineffable 
judgment. This judgment will go a long way in protecting judicial officers 
of the district judiciary from being subjected to departmental action 
for alleged wrong or incorrect exercise of discretion in passing orders 
of bail without anything more.  Brother Viswanathan has put it very 
pithily, saying that if the complaint of misconduct against the judicial 
officer is prima facie found to be true then, in such circumstances, 
disciplinary proceedings must be taken, and no leniency should be 
shown if the charges are established.  In an appropriate case, even 
criminal prosecution may be instituted against a judicial officer. Such 
action is necessary to weed out tainted judges from the judiciary. It goes 
without saying that corruption in the judiciary at any level is intolerable, 
as corruption severely undermines the core of the administration of 
justice and erodes public trust in the rule of law. However, the High 
Court, which is vested with the supervisory control must keep in mind 
that a judicial officer of the district judiciary works mostly in a charged 
atmosphere.  A mere wrong order or wrong exercise of discretion in 
grant of bail by itself without anything more, cannot be a ground to 
initiate departmental proceedings. 
2.	
Initiation of departmental proceedings on mere suspicion is one 
of the primary causes why trial court judges are reluctant when it 
comes to exercising discretion for the purpose of grant of bail. It 
should not happen that because of the lurking fear in the mind of 
a trial court judge, of some administrative action being taken that 
even in a deserving case, well within the principles of law, bail 
is declined. This is one reason why the High Courts are flooded 
with bail applications. The same is the scenario even so far as the 
Supreme Court is concerned. Over a period of time, the trial court 
judges have exhibited tendency to shirk from their solemn judicial 
function and responsibility when it comes to exercising discretion in 
matters relating to bail. Courts of the district judiciary wield powers 
necessary for the functioning of the justice delivery system in India 
and when their autonomy is compromised by higher courts and fear 
takes precedence over judicial duties, democracy and the rule of 
law suffer. 

118
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
3.	
For functioning of democracy, an independent judiciary to dispense 
justice without fear and favour is paramount. As held by this Court 
in M.S. Bindra versus Union reported in (1998) 7 SCC 310 while 
evaluating the materials the authority should not altogether ignore 
the reputation in which the officer was held till recently. The maxim 
“Nemo Firut Repente Turpissimus” (no one becomes dishonest all 
of a sudden) is not unexceptional but still is a salutary guideline to 
judge human conduct, particularly in the field of Administrative Law. 
The authorities should not keep the eyes totally closed towards the 
overall estimation in which the delinquent officer was held in the 
recent past by those who were supervising him earlier. To dunk an 
officer into the puddle of “doubtful integrity” it is not enough that 
the doubt fringes on a mere hunch. That doubt should be of such 
a nature as would reasonably and consciously be entertainable by 
a reasonable man on the given material. Mere possibility is hardly 
sufficient to assume that it would have happened. There must be 
preponderance of probability for the reasonable man to entertain 
doubt regarding that possibility. Only then there is justification to 
ram an officer with the label ‘doubtful integrity’.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
