[2026] 1 S.C.R. 1 : 2026 INSC 5
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited
v.
Santosh Cordeiro and Another 
(Civil Appeal No. 36 of 2026)
05 January 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala and K.V. Viswanathan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court has rightly allowed the application filed by 
the respondent u/s.11, Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.
Headnotes†
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.11(6A) – Presidency 
Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 – s.41 – Single Judge allowed 
the s.11, A&C Act application filed by the respondent seeking 
appointment of a sole arbitrator in accordance with clause 
33 of the arbitration agreement of the Leave and License 
Agreement, and appointed an arbitrator to adjudicate the 
dispute between the parties – Appellant took objection that 
the dispute is non-arbitrable in view of s.41, 1882 Act – 
Raised the ground of non-arbitrability u/s.41,1882 Act before 
the arbitrator and filed a s.16 application under the A&C Act 
before the arbitrator – Dismissed by arbitrator – Whether the 
High Court had rightly allowed the application filed by the 
respondent u/s.11, A&C Act:
Held: Leave and License agreement in Clause 33 contained an 
Arbitration clause – Paragraph 40 of the Full Bench judgment of 
the Bombay High Court in Central Warehousing relied on by the 
appellant cannot be understood on the facts of the present case 
to mean that Clause 33 of the Leave and License Agreement 
containing the arbitration clause has ceased to exist – An 
examination u/s.11(6-A) indicates that there exists an arbitration 
agreement between the parties – Furthermore, s.41 is a provision 
conferring jurisdiction on the Small Causes Court for certain types 
of disputes and cannot be interpreted to mean that ex proprio vigore 
(by its own force), it neutralizes arbitration clauses in agreements – 
Conferment of jurisdiction on a specific court or creation of a public 
* Author

2
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
forum, may not be the decisive test to answer and decide whether 
arbitrability is impliedly barred – Since, the Arbitrator has taken a 
decision on the s.16 application thus, parties have to work out their 
remedies in accordance with law – As and when such remedies 
are resorted to, they will be decided uninfluenced by any of the 
observations made herein – All questions between the parties 
other than the one answered herein based on s.11(6-A), A&C Act 
are left open. [Paras 14, 17, 21, 23, 27]
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.11(6A) – Presidency 
Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 – Appellant relied on the 
Full Bench judgment of the Bombay High Court in Central 
Warehousing which inter alia held that the Arbitration 
Agreement in the situation referred therein would be invalid 
and inoperative on the principle that it would be against public 
policy to allow the parties to contract out of the exclusive 
jurisdiction of Small Causes Court by virtue of s.41 of the Act 
of 1882 – Appellant submitted that in view of this holding, even 
while examining within the contours of s.11(6-A) this Court will 
be obliged to conclude that no arbitration agreement existed:
Held: Submission not countenanced, reasons stated – Paragraph 
40 of Central Warehousing cannot be understood on the facts 
of the present case to mean that Clause 33 of the Leave and 
License Agreement has ceased to exist – The judgement in Central 
Warehousing is dealt with only to decipher whether on account 
of the said judgement, Clause 33 of the Leave and License 
Agreement in the present case, containing the arbitration clause 
is non-existent – It is not – An examination u/s.11(6-A) indicates 
that there exists an arbitration agreement between the parties – An 
appeal is pending in this Court against the judgement in Central 
Warehousing – That appeal may be decided on its own merits – This 
Court is not to be taken to have pronounced on the correctness of 
Central Warehousing one way or the other. [Paras 21, 23]
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.11(6-A) – Presidency 
Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 – s.41:
Held: Leave and License agreement in Clause 33 contained an 
Arbitration clause – In a proceeding u/s.11, A&C Act, the Court 
is to confine the examination to the existence of an Arbitration 
Agreement  – s.11(6-A) which was brought into force w.e.f 
23.10.2015, though omitted by Act 33 of 2019, the omission has 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
3
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
not yet been notified – Hence, the jurisdiction of this Court is 
only to inspect or scrutinize the dealings between the parties for 
determination about the existence of an Arbitration Agreement. 
[Paras 14, 17]
Arbitration – Issue of arbitrability or otherwise of a dispute – 
Conferment of jurisdiction on a specific court or creation of 
a public forum not the decisive test to answer and decide 
whether arbitrability is impliedly barred:
Held: Creation of a specific forum as a substitute for Civil Court 
or specifying the Civil Court may not be enough to accept the 
inference of implicit non-arbitrability – Conferment of jurisdiction 
on a specific court or creation of a public forum though eminently 
significant, may not be the decisive test to answer and decide 
whether arbitrability is impliedly barred. [Para 21]
Case Law Cited
Natraj Studios Private Limited. v. Navrang Studios and Another 
[1981] 2 SCR 466 : (1981) 1 SCC 523; Booz Allen and Hamilton 
Inc v. SBI Home Finance Limited and Others [2011] 7 SCR 310 : 
(2011) 5 SCC 532; Vidya Drolia and Others v. Durga Trading 
Corporation [2020] 11 SCR 1001 : (2021) 2 SCC 1; In re Interplay 
Between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 & Stamp Act, 1899 [2023] 15 SCR 1081 : (2024) 6 
SCC 1; Vidya Drolia and Others v. Durga Trading [2017] 10 SCR 
139 : (2017) 10 SCC 706 – referred to.
Central Warehousing Corporation, Mumbai v. Fortpoint Automotive 
Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, 2009 SCC OnLine Bom 2023;Globsport 
India Pvt. Ltd. v. Mayfair Housing Pvt. Ltd. (2015) OnLine Bom 
4176 – referred to.
List of Acts
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996; Presidency Small Cause Courts 
Act, 1882; Contract Act, 1872.
List of Keywords
Section 11(6A), Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996; Section 41, 
Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882; Dispute non-arbitrable; 
Non-arbitrability under Section 41, Presidency Small Cause 

4
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Courts Act, 1882; Arbitration agreement of the Leave and License 
Agreement; Leave and License agreement contained Arbitration 
clause; Section 16, Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996; There 
exists an arbitration agreement between the parties; Small Causes 
Court; ex proprio vigore (by its own force).
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 36 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.05.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in CAA No. 9 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Chirag M. Shah, Ms. Sanjana Saddy.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Rishabh Shah, Dhaval Mehrotra, Ms. Shivani Bansal, Ms. Aditi 
Desai, For M/s. ADS Legal.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the order 
dated 02.05.2024 passed by the Single Judge of the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay in Commercial Arbitration Application No.9 
of 2024. By the said order, the learned Single Judge allowed the 
Section 11 Application filed by the respondent under the Arbitration 
& Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short “the A&C Act”) and appointed 
an arbitrator to adjudicate the dispute between the parties. The 
only objection taken by the appellant herein was that the dispute is 
non-arbitrable in view of Section 41 of the Presidency Small Cause 
Courts Act, 1882 (for short “the 1882 Act”). The learned Single 
Judge made a short shrift of the said objection by holding that the 
place where the property in question, which was the subject matter 
of the dispute, was situated, i.e. Malad, was outside the jurisdiction 
of the Small Causes Court. This finding has now turned out to be 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
5
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
a damp squib, since parties before us are ad idem that Malad area 
is covered under the jurisdiction of the Small Causes Court. We 
could have rest content by remanding the matter to the High Court 
for fresh consideration. However, that will only prolong the dispute 
and, hence, we have decided to answer the issues arising in the 
case ourselves.
BRIEF FACTS OF THE CASE: -
3.	
With regard to the premises situated at Unit No.718, admeasuring 
2925 sq. ft., 7th Floor, Palm Spring Centre, Link Road, Malad (West), 
Mumbai, the appellant entered into a Leave and License Agreement 
on 06.10.2017 with the respondent. The period of the Leave and 
License was 60 months from 01.10.2017 to 30.10.2022. Though 
the appellant terminated the said agreement on 31.12.2019, after 
exchange of correspondence between the parties, the said termination 
was reversed and an Addendum dated 13.03.2020 was entered 
into extending the Leave and License period from 60 months to 96 
months with a lock-in period of 72 months.
4.	
According to the appellant, due to COVID-19 pandemic, they were 
unable to continue the arrangement and citing the force majeure 
clause in the agreement, they handed over the keys and vacant 
peaceful possession of the premises to the respondent on 09.09.2020. 
According to the appellant, they intimated the respondents about the 
same on 10.10.2020 by writing an email. The appellant also sought 
refund of the security deposit.
5.	
On 28.06.2023, the respondent No.1 called upon the appellant to 
pay a sum of Rs.94,40,152/- along with interest @ 24% towards the 
alleged arrears of license fees for the balance lock-in period i.e. from 
01.09.2020 to 14.06.2023. The appellants wrote back on 17.07.2023 
denying any liability and seeking refund of security deposit of Rs. 
10 lakhs.
6.	
The appellant on 17.07.2023 received a notice dated 15.07.2023 
issued by the respondent under Section 21 of the A&C Act invoking 
Clause 33 of the arbitration agreement of the Leave and License 
Agreement dated 06.10.2017 and Addendum dated 13.03.2020. 
Clause 33 of the Leave and License Agreement dated 06.10.2017 
reads as under: -

6
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“In the event of the any dispute or difference arising 
between the Licensors and the Licensee hereto concerning 
or relating to the interpretation of these presents or the 
interpretation or effect of any provisions thereof or relating 
to the liability or obligation on the part of any of the parties 
hereto, the same shall be referred to arbitration and Sole 
Arbitrator shall be appointed by the mutual consent of 
the Parties. The award passed by the sole arbitrator 
shall be binding on both the parties. The arbitration shall 
be in Mumbai and in accordance with and subject to the 
provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 or 
any statutory modification or re-enhancements thereof for 
the time being in force.”
This was followed by an application under Section 11 of the A&C 
Act filed on 13.08.2023 by the respondent seeking appointment of 
a sole arbitrator in accordance with clause 33 set out above.
7.	
On 01.11.2023, the appellant filed its reply objecting to the appointment 
of the arbitrator and specifically relied on Section 41 of the 1882 Act 
and contended that only the Small Causes Court would have exclusive 
jurisdiction to entertain and try any suit or proceeding arising from 
the relationship between a licensor and licensee and that since the 
said statute is a special remedy, the dispute is not arbitrable. The 
High Court, by its order dated 02.05.2024, allowed the application 
and appointed the arbitrator. 
8.	
Section 41 of the 1882 Act reads as under:-
“41. Suits or Proceedings between licensors and 
licensees or landlords and tenants for recovery of 
possession of immovable property and license fees 
or rent, except to those to which other Acts apply to 
lie in Small Cause Court.- (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained elsewhere in this Act but subject to the provisions 
of sub-section (2), the Court of Small Cause shall have 
jurisdiction to entertain and try all suits and proceedings 
between a licensor and licensee, or a landlord and tenant, 
relating to the recovery of possession of any immovable 
property situated in Greater Bombay, or relating to the 
recovery of the licence fee or charges or rent therefor, 
irrespective of the value of the subject-matter of such 
suits or proceedings.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
7
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to 
suits or proceedings for the recovery of possession of any 
immovable property, or of licence fee for charges of rent 
thereof, to which the provisions of the Bombay Rents, Hotel 
and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, the Bombay 
Government Premises (Eviction) Act, 1955, the Bombay 
Municipal Corporation Act, the Maharashtra Housing and 
Area Development Act, 1976 or any other law for the time 
being in force, apply.”
9.	
Proceedings before the arbitrator were carried on. On 03.06.2024, 
the appellant raised the ground of non-arbitrability under Section 41 
of the 1882 Act and filed a Section 16 application under the A&C 
Act before the arbitrator. On 11.10.2024, the arbitrator dismissed 
the Section 16 application by holding that the amount sought to be 
recovered partakes the character of a ‘debt’ and is not a claim for 
license fee for use and occupation. On 28.01.2025, the Special Leave 
Petition was filed before this Court and this Court, on 21.02.2025, 
stayed the impugned order. That is how the matter presents itself 
before us.
10.	 We have heard Mr. Chirag M. Shah, learned advocate, for the appellant 
and Mr. Rishabh Shah, learned advocate for the respondents. We 
have perused the records as well as written submissions filed by 
the respective parties.
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANT: -
11.	 The learned counsel for the appellant contends that in the Section 
11 application filed by the respondents, a clear case for recovery of 
license fee was sought, and expressly it was stated that the amount 
claimed did not partake the character of damages; that the reliance 
on the judgment of the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court 
in Globsport India Pvt. Ltd. vs. Mayfair Housing Pvt. Ltd1 was 
untenable in view of the Full Bench judgment of the Bombay High 
Court in Central Warehousing Corporation, Mumbai v. Fortpoint 
Automotive Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai2; that Central Warehousing (supra) 
clearly holds that exclusive jurisdiction is conferred on the Court 
1	
(2015) OnLine Bom 4176
2	
2009 SCC OnLine Bom 2023

8
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of Small Causes to entertain and decide all suits and proceedings 
between a licensor and licensee or a landlord and tenant relating 
to recovery of possession or recovery of license fee/rent in respect 
of premises situated in Greater Bombay; that this Court in Natraj 
Studios Private Limited. v. Navrang Studios and Another3, while 
interpreting a pari materia provision held that the parties could not 
contract out of a special legislation that conferred exclusive jurisdiction 
over landlord-tenant disputes to the Small Causes Court; that as 
long as the suit was between a licensor and licensee or a landlord 
and tenant, concerning immovable property, relating to recovery of 
possession or recovery of license fee, charges or rent, it will lie only 
before the Small Causes Court and the jurisdiction of all other courts 
is ousted; that the 1882 Act is a special legislation with a special 
purpose and grants exclusive jurisdiction on special courts which 
have been set up under such legislation and that in Booz Allen 
and Hamilton Inc vs. SBI Home Finance Limited And Others4, 
this Court held that tenancy/licensor/licensee disputes governed by 
special statutes are not arbitrable.
CONTENTIONS OF THE RESPONDENT: -
12.	 The learned counsel for the respondent submitted the only exclusion 
in Clause 355 of the agreement was that the arbitrator was not to 
have power to interfere or arbitrate on issue of vacating the premises 
on expiry of license period and there was no bar to arbitrate on the 
obligation on the parties to pay the license fee/rent/use and occupation 
charges; that the dispute was only for payment of compensation 
for the “balance lock-in period”; that the claim of the respondents 
is neither for recovery of possession nor license fee; that the 
respondents’ case is supported by the judgment in Globsport (supra); 
that the judgment in Vidya Drolia And Others vs. Durga Trading 
Corporation6, (hereinafter called Vidya Drolia - II), makes it clear 
that mere conferral of jurisdiction on a specific court or creation of a 
public fora would not be decisive to answer the issue of arbitrability 
3	
(1981) 1 SCC 523
4	
(2011) 5 SCC 532
5	
The reference to arbitration will in no way affect the obligation of the Licensee to vacate the licensed 
premises on the expiry or earlier determination of the License period and the arbitrators shall have no 
power to interfere with or arbitrate on issue of vacating the licensed premises on expiry of the licensed 
period.
6	
(2021) 2 SCC 1

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
9
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
or otherwise of a dispute; and that no statutory protection under the 
Maharashtra Rent Control Act was denied to the appellant.
QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION: -
13.	 In the above background, the question for consideration is whether the 
High Court has rightly allowed the application filed by the respondent 
under Section 11 of the A&C Act?
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION: -
14.	 There is no dispute that the Leave and License agreement of 
06.10.2017, in Clause 33, contained an Arbitration clause. In a 
proceeding under Section 11 of the A&C Act, the Court is to confine 
the examination to the existence of an Arbitration Agreement. Section 
11 (6-A) which was brought into force with effect from 23.10.2015, 
though omitted by Act 33 of 2019, the omission has not yet been 
notified. 
15.	 Section 11(6A) of the A&C Act is reproduced hereunder:-
“11. Appointment of arbitrators.—(1) xxx xxx .
(2) xxx xxx 
(3) xxx xxx 
(4) xxx xxx 
(5) xxx xxx 
(6) xxx xxx 
(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court, while considering any application under sub-
section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), shall, 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any 
Court, confine to the examination of the existence of an 
arbitration agreement.”
16.	 A Seven Judge Bench of this Court in In re Interplay Between 
Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 & Stamp Act, 18997, (hereinafter called as ‘In re-Interplay’) 
7	
(2024) 6 SCC 1

10
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
while dealing with the aspect of how Vidya Drolia (Supra) proceeded 
on the assumption that Section 11(6-A) has been omitted, clarified 
the position thus:-
“62. A plain reading of Section 11(6-A) makes it evident 
that it is referring to an arbitration agreement. Section 
11(6-A) provides that courts must confine themselves to an 
examination of the existence of the arbitration agreement. 
The word “confine” indicates the intention of the legislature 
to limit the jurisdiction of the Courts at the stage of the 
appointment of an arbitrator.
63. In Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., 
(2021) 2 SCC 1], this Court held : (SCC p. 49, para 21)
“21. The term “agreement” is not defined in the Arbitration 
Act, albeit it is defined in Section 10 of the Contract Act, 
1872 (for short “the Contract Act”), … as contracts made 
by free consent of parties competent to contract, for a 
lawful consideration and with a lawful object, and are not 
thereby expressly declared to be void. Section 10 of the 
Contract Act also stipulates that aforesaid requirements 
shall not affect any law in force in India (and not expressly 
repealed) by which a contract is required to be made in 
writing, in presence of witnesses or any law relating to 
registration of documents. Thus, an arbitration agreement 
should satisfy the mandate of Section 10 of the Contract 
Act, in addition to satisfying other requirements stipulated 
in Section 7 of the Arbitration Act.”
64. The above observations are correct insofar as the 
arbitration agreement must satisfy the requirements of 
the Contract Act. However, the authority empowered to 
adjudicate whether the requirements of the Contract Act 
are satisfied is the Arbitral Tribunal, under Section 16 of 
the Arbitration Act. This is addressed in greater detail in 
the following segments.
163. We are of the opinion that the above premise of the 
Court in Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., 
[(2021) 2 SCC 1] is erroneous because the omission of 
Section 11(6-A) has not been notified and, therefore, the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
11
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
said provision continues to remain in full force. Since 
Section 11(6-A) continues to remain in force, pending the 
notification of the Central Government, it is incumbent 
upon this Court to give true effect to the legislative intent.
164. The 2015 Amendment Act has laid down different 
parameters for judicial review under Section 8 and 
Section 11. Where Section 8 requires the Referral 
Court to look into the prima facie existence of a valid 
arbitration agreement, Section 11 confines the Court’s 
jurisdiction to the examination of the existence of 
an arbitration agreement. Although the object and 
purpose behind both Sections 8 and 11 is to compel 
parties to abide by their contractual understanding, the 
scope of power of the Referral Courts under the said 
provisions is intended to be different. The same is also 
evident from the fact that Section 37 of the Arbitration 
Act allows an appeal from the order of an Arbitral 
Tribunal refusing to refer the parties to arbitration 
under Section 8, but not from Section 11. Thus, the 
2015 Amendment Act has legislatively overruled the 
dictum of Patel Engg. [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., 
(2005) 8 SCC 618] where it was held that Section 8 and 
Section 11 are complementary in nature. Accordingly, 
the two provisions cannot be read as laying down a 
similar standard.
165. The legislature confined the scope of reference 
under Section 11(6-A) to the examination of the 
existence of an arbitration agreement. The use of the 
term “examination” in itself connotes that the scope 
of the power is limited to a prima facie determination. 
Since the Arbitration Act is a self-contained code, the 
requirement of “existence” of an arbitration agreement 
draws effect from Section 7 of the Arbitration Act. In 
Duro Felguera [Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram 
Port Ltd., (2017) 9 SCC 729, this Court held that the 
Referral Courts only need to consider one aspect to 
determine the existence of an arbitration agreement — 
whether the underlying contract contains an arbitration 
agreement which provides for arbitration pertaining to 

12
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the disputes which have arisen between the parties to 
the agreement. Therefore, the scope of examination 
under Section 11(6-A) should be confined to the 
existence of an arbitration agreement on the basis 
of Section 7. Similarly, the validity of an arbitration 
agreement, in view of Section 7, should be restricted 
to the requirement of formal validity such as the 
requirement that the agreement be in writing. This 
interpretation also gives true effect to the doctrine 
of competence-competence by leaving the issue of 
substantive existence and validity of an arbitration 
agreement to be decided by Arbitral Tribunal under 
Section 16. We accordingly clarify the position of law 
laid down in Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading 
Corpn., (2021) 2 SCC 1 in the context of Section 8 and 
Section 11 of the Arbitration Act.
166. The burden of proving the existence of arbitration 
agreement generally lies on the party seeking to rely on 
such agreement. In jurisdictions such as India, which 
accept the doctrine of competence-competence, only prima 
facie proof of the existence of an arbitration agreement 
must be adduced before the Referral Court. The Referral 
Court is not the appropriate forum to conduct a mini-trial 
by allowing the parties to adduce the evidence in regard to 
the existence or validity of an arbitration agreement. The 
determination of the existence and validity of an arbitration 
agreement on the basis of evidence ought to be left to the 
Arbitral Tribunal. This position of law can also be gauged 
from the plain language of the statute.
167. Section 11(6-A) uses the expression “examination 
of the existence of an arbitration agreement”. The 
purport of using the word “examination” connotes 
that the legislature intends that the Referral Court 
has to inspect or scrutinise the dealings between the 
parties for the existence of an arbitration agreement. 
Moreover, the expression “examination” does not 
connote or imply a laborious or contested inquiry. [ P. 
Ramanatha Aiyar, The Law Lexicon (2nd Edn., 1997) 
666.] On the other hand, Section 16 provides that the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
13
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
Arbitral Tribunal can “rule” on its jurisdiction, including 
the existence and validity of an arbitration agreement. 
A “ruling” connotes adjudication of disputes after 
admitting evidence from the parties. Therefore, it 
is evident that the Referral Court is only required 
to examine the existence of arbitration agreements, 
whereas the Arbitral Tribunal ought to rule on its 
jurisdiction, including the issues pertaining to the 
existence and validity of an arbitration agreement. A 
similar view was adopted by this Court in Shin-Etsu 
Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 
234].
169. When the Referral Court renders a prima facie opinion, 
neither the Arbitral Tribunal, nor the Court enforcing the 
arbitral award will be bound by such a prima facie view. 
If a prima facie view as to the existence of an arbitration 
agreement is taken by the Referral Court, it still allows 
the Arbitral Tribunal to examine the issue in depth. Such 
a legal approach will help the Referral Court in weeding 
out prima facie non-existent arbitration agreements. It will 
also protect the jurisdictional competence of the Arbitral 
Tribunals to decide on issues pertaining to the existence 
and validity of an arbitration agreement.”
[Emphasis supplied]
17.	 Hence, it is very clear that our jurisdiction is only to inspect or 
scrutinize the dealings between the parties for determination about 
the existence of an Arbitration Agreement. We are not to launch a 
laborious or a contested inquiry. 
18.	 Our task would have been much simpler but for the reliance placed 
by the learned counsel for the appellant on the Full Bench judgment 
of the Bombay High Court in Central Warehousing (supra). Central 
Warehousing (supra) examined the question whether in view of 
Section 58 of the A&C Act, if in any agreement between licensor 
8	
Extent of judicial intervention.- Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so provided 
in this Part. 

14
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and licensee an arbitration clause exists, the jurisdiction of the Small 
Causes Court under the Presidency Small Causes Court Act, 1882, 
would be ousted. 
19.	 While answering the said question, the Full Bench traced the 
legislative history of Section 41(2) of the Act of 1882. It found that 
the object of introducing Section 41 in the amended form, was to 
avoid multiplicity of proceedings in different Courts and consequent 
waste of public time and money and to avoid unnecessary delay and 
hardship to the suitors. The Full Bench found that the objective was 
to have uniformity of the procedure so that all suits and proceedings 
between a landlord and tenant or a licensor and licensee for recovery 
of possession of premises or for recovery of rent or license fee, 
irrespective of the value of the subject matter, should go to and be 
disposed of by Small Causes Court. The Full Bench found that the 
provision vested exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of Small Causes 
to entertain such suits. Ultimately, for the purpose of our case we 
only need to deal with the operative portion set out in Para 40 of 
the said judgment which reads as under: -
“40. In summation, we would hold that section 41(1) of the 
Act of 1882 is a special law which in turn has constituted 
special Courts for adjudication of disputes specified 
therein between the licensor and licensee or a landlord 
and tenant. The effect of section 41(2) of the Act of 1882 
is only the suits or proceedings for recovery of possession 
of immovable property or of licence fee thereof, to which, 
the provisions of specified Acts or any other law for the 
time being in force apply, have been excepted from the 
application of non-obstante clause contained in section 
41(1) of the Act. The expression “or any other law for the 
time being in force” appearing in section 41(2) will have 
to be construed to mean that such law should provide for 
resolution of disputes between licensor and licensee or 
a landlord and tenant in relation to immovable property 
or licence fee thereof, to which immovable property, the 
provisions of that Act are applicable. The Act of 1996 is not 
covered within the ambit of section 41(2) in particular the 
expression “or any other law for the time being in force” 
contained therein. The question whether the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the Small Causes Court vested in terms of 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
15
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
section 41 of the Act of 1882 is ousted, if an agreement 
between the licensor and licensee contains a clause for 
arbitration, the same will have to be answered in the 
negative. For, section 5 of the Act of 1996 in that sense is 
not an absolute non-obstante clause. Section 5 of the Act 
of 1996 cannot affect the laws for the time being in force 
by virtue of which certain disputes may not be submitted 
to arbitration, as stipulated in section 2(3) of the Act of 
1996. We hold that section 41 of the Act of 1882 falls 
within the ambit of section 2(3) of the Act of 1996. As a 
result of which, even if the Licence Agreement contains 
Arbitration Agreement, the exclusive jurisdiction of 
the Courts of Small Causes under section 41 of the 
Act of 1882 is not affected in any manner. Whereas, 
Arbitration Agreement in such cases would be invalid 
and inoperative on the principle that it would be against 
public policy to allow the parties to contract out of the 
exclusive jurisdiction of the Small Causes Courts by 
virtue of section 41 of the Act of 1882.”
[Emphasis supplied]
20.	 The appellant relies on the above paragraph which holds that the 
Arbitration Agreement in the situation referred to in the paragraph 
would be invalid and inoperative on the principle that it would be 
against public policy to allow the parties to contract out of the 
exclusive jurisdiction of Small Causes Court by virtue of Section 41 
of the Act of 1882.
21.	 The learned counsel for the appellant submits that in view of this 
holding, even while examining within the contours of Section 11(6-A) 
this Court will be obliged to conclude that no arbitration agreement 
existed. We are not able to countenance the submission of the 
learned counsel for the appellant for the following reasons: -
I.	
(a). Firstly, Central Warehousing (supra) has to be understood 
in the context in which it came to be decided. The said context 
does not obtain here. In Central Warehousing (supra), the 
petitioner therein, issued termination notices terminating the 
storage warehouse facilities of the respondent therein – FAP 
Limited. In response thereto, the respondent therein FAP 
Limited invoked the arbitration clause. Respondent-FAP Limited 

16
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
thereafter, filed a suit under Section 41 of the Act of 1882 for 
a declaration that the agreement providing storage facility was 
subsisting and obtained interim orders restraining the petitioner 
therein from giving effect to the termination notices. The petitioner 
therein - Central Warehousing raised an objection based on the 
provisions of Section 8 of the A&C Act. The preliminary objection 
was overruled. Aggrieved, Central Warehousing approached 
the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. 
What is significant to notice is that the respondent therein FAP 
Limited was in possession of the premises. 
(b). In the present case, it is undisputed by both parties that 
possession had been handed over by the appellant to the 
respondents in September 2020. The dispute between the 
parties is with regard to a monetary claim with the appellant 
asserting that the security deposit should be repaid by the 
respondents and the respondents claiming sums of money 
towards alleged arrears of amounts payable for the balance 
lock-in period. This aspect is set out only for explaining the 
context of the present case and contrasting with the context in 
Central Warehousing (supra). 
II.	
(a). Secondly, pursuant to a reference made to a three-
Judge Bench in Vidya Drolia and Others v. Durga Trading 
Corporation9., (hereinafter called Vidya Drolia-I), this Court 
pronounced the judgment in Vidya Drolia–II (supra). Though the 
judgment in re - Interplay (supra) corrected Vidya Drolia-II on 
the aspect of the continuance of Section 11(6-A) in the statute 
and the interpretation of the said sub-section, the other aspects 
in Vidya Drolia-II have not been diluted in re - Interplay (supra). 
(b). Vidya Drolia-II was actually occasioned due to another 
judgment of this Court in Himangni Enterprises v. Kamaljeet 
Singh Ahluwalia10, which had treated cases of ejectment 
under the Transfer of Property Act similar to cases of eviction 
under the Rent Control Act of the State. The Bench in Vidya 
Drolia-I doubted the said judgment and in a detailed referral 
order distinguished the applicability of the prior judgments of 
9	
(2019) 20 SCC 406
10	
(2017) 10 SCC 706

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
17
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
this Court in Natraj Studios (supra) and Booz Allen (supra) 
to ejectment suits under the Transfer of Property Act.
(c). While dealing with the aspect of implied bars on arbitrability, 
Vidya Drolia-II made the following pertinent observations: -
“53.Dhulabhai case  [Dhulabhai  v.  State of M.P., 
(1968) 3 SCR 662 : AIR 1969 SC 78] is not directly 
applicable as it relates to exclusion of jurisdiction of 
civil courts, albeit we respectfully agree with the order 
of reference [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading Corpn., 
(2019) 20 SCC 406] that Condition 2 is apposite while 
examining the question of non-arbitrability. Implied 
legislative intention to exclude arbitration can be seen 
if it appears that the statute creates a special right or 
a liability and provides for determination of the right 
and liability to be dealt with by the specified courts or 
the tribunals specially constituted in that behalf and 
further lays down that all questions about the said 
right and liability shall be determined by the court or 
tribunals so empowered and vested with exclusive 
jurisdiction. Therefore, mere creation of a specific 
forum as a substitute for civil court or specifying 
the civil court, may not be enough to accept the 
inference of implicit non-arbitrability. Conferment 
of jurisdiction on a specific court or creation of a 
public forum though eminently significant, may 
not be the decisive test to answer and decide 
whether arbitrability is impliedly barred.”
[Emphasis supplied]
What is crucial to notice is that this Court clearly emphasized 
that creation of a specific forum as a substitute for Civil Court 
or specifying the Civil Court may not be enough to accept the 
inference of implicit non-arbitrability. Conferment of jurisdiction 
on a specific court or creation of a public forum though eminently 
significant, may not be the decisive test to answer and decide 
whether arbitrability is impliedly barred. 
(d). Further for the completion of record, it is also mentioned 
herein that Vidya Drolia-II expressly overruled Himangni (supra) 
and held as under: - 

18
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“79. Landlord-tenant disputes governed by the 
Transfer of Property Act are arbitrable as they are 
not actions in rem but pertain to subordinate rights in 
personam that arise from rights in rem. Such actions 
normally [Ed. : Certainly in those cases where the 
dispute only affects the parties to the arbitration 
clause, third-party rights would not be affected, as in 
the facts of the present case. It is in such cases that 
“such actions under the TPA normally would not affect 
third-party rights or have erga omnes effect”. However, 
one may consider cases for instance, where a sub-
tenancy exists or where the head lessee has taken a 
mortgage on the lease, and the landlord invokes the 
arbitration clause against the head lessee seeking 
to terminate the head lease, can the sub-tenant or 
mortgagee of the head lessee seek to be impleaded 
in the arbitration proceedings? For termination of the 
head lease would also extinguish the rights of the 
sub-tenant and the mortgagee of the head lessee. The 
situations posited are relatively simple ones. Often 
there are numerous prior and subsequent transferees 
who might be affected by the result of a dispute 
between a landlord and tenant, or even between other 
transferees. In such complex situations involving prior 
and subsequent transfers, it would appear that the 
matter would be non-arbitrable as it would appear to 
satisfy the first two tests of non-arbitrability laid down 
herein—see Shortnotes B and C. In a case where 
the mortgagee is covered by the RDB Act and the 
Sarfaesi Act, it might be rendered non-arbitrable by 
virtue of the fourth test as well—see Shortnotes E 
and G.] would not affect third-party rights or have 
erga omnes effect or require centralised adjudication. 
An award passed deciding landlord-tenant disputes 
can be executed and enforced like a decree of the 
civil court. Landlord-tenant disputes do not relate 
to inalienable and sovereign functions of the State. 
The provisions of the Transfer of Property Act do not 
expressly or by necessary implication bar arbitration. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
19
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
The Transfer of Property Act, like all other Acts, has 
a public purpose, that is, to regulate landlord-tenant 
relationships and the arbitrator would be bound by 
the provisions, including provisions which enure and 
protect the tenants.
80. In view of the aforesaid, we overrule the ratio 
laid down in Himangni Enterprises [Himangni 
Enterprises  v. Kamaljeet Singh Ahluwalia, (2017) 
10 SCC 706 : (2018) 1 SCC (Civ) 82] and hold 
that landlord-tenant disputes are arbitrable as the 
Transfer of Property Act does not forbid or foreclose 
arbitration. However, landlord-tenant disputes covered 
and governed by rent control legislation would not 
be arbitrable when specific court or forum has been 
given exclusive jurisdiction to apply and decide special 
rights and obligations. Such rights and obligations can 
only be adjudicated and enforced by the specified 
court/forum, and not through arbitration.”
III.	
Thirdly, if in this context, Section 41 is appreciated, it will be 
clear that Section 41 is a provision conferring jurisdiction on the 
Small Causes Court for certain types of disputes and cannot be 
interpreted to mean that ex proprio vigore (by its own force), it 
neutralizes arbitration clauses in agreements. 
IV.	
Fourthly, Arbitration clauses have their roots in Section 28 of the 
Contract Act, 1872, a provision completely missed in Central 
Warehousing (Supra). Section 28 which speaks of agreements 
in restraint of legal proceeding being void, has two important 
exceptions. Relevant part of Section 28 and exceptions are 
extracted hereinbelow. 
“28. Agreements in restraint of legal proceedings, 
void.— Every agreement,— (a) by which any party 
thereto is restricted absolutely from enforcing his 
rights under or in respect of any contract, by the usual 
legal proceedings in the ordinary tribunals, or which 
limits the time within which he may thus enforce his 
rights; or (b) which extinguishes the rights of any 
party thereto, or discharges any party thereto, from 
any liability, under or in respect of any contract on 

20
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the expiry of a specified period so as to restrict any 
party from enforcing his rights, is void to the extent.” 
Exception 1.—Saving of contract to refer to 
arbitration dispute that may arise.—This section 
shall not render illegal a contract, by which two or 
more persons agree that any dispute which may 
arise between them in respect of any subject or class 
of subjects shall be referred to arbitration, and that 
only the amount awarded in such arbitration shall 
be recoverable in respect of the dispute so referred. 
Exception 2.- Saving of contract to refer questions 
that have already arisen.- Nor shall this section 
render illegal any contract in writing, by which two 
or more persons agree to refer to arbitration any 
question between them which has already arisen, or 
affect any provision of any law in force for the time 
being as to references to arbitration.”
It will be clear that when two or more persons agree to refer a matter 
to arbitration, Section 28 will not render that agreement invalid.
22.	 Considerable arguments were advanced both in the oral submissions 
and in the written note about whether the nature of the claim is in 
the form of debt or whether it pertains to a matter covered by the 
ambit of Section 41(1). Arguments were also advanced on the issue 
as to how the dispute between the parties is a dispute in personam 
(as contended by the respondent) pertaining only to the recovery of 
a debt as opposed to the appellant contending that it is a dispute 
relating to the recovery of the license fee or charges or rent, covered 
under Section 41(1) of the 1882 Act. Reliance was placed on Natraj 
Studios (supra) and Booz Allen (supra) by the appellant and 
Globsport (supra) by the respondents.
23.	 In exercise of our jurisdiction under Section 11, we are not concerned 
with the said dispute. That will be for the arbitrator to decide. We have 
been told that the Arbitrator has taken a decision on the Section 16 
application. If that be so, parties have to work out their remedies in 
accordance with law. As and when such remedies are resorted to, 
they will be decided uninfluenced by any of the observations made 
herein. All questions between the parties other than the one answered 
herein based on Section 11(6-A) of the A&C Act are left open.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
21
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
24.	 Section 16 of the A&C Act reads as under: -
“16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its 
jurisdiction.—(1) The arbitral tribunal may rule on its own 
jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections with respect 
to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement, 
and for that purpose,— 
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract 
shall be treated as an agreement independent of the other 
terms of the contract; and 
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is 
null and void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity of the 
arbitration clause. 
(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have 
jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the submission 
of the statement of defence; however, a party shall not 
be precluded from raising such a plea merely because 
that he has appointed, or participated in the appointment 
of, an arbitrator. 
(3) A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of 
its authority shall be raised as soon as the matter alleged 
to be beyond the scope of its authority is raised during 
the arbitral proceedings. 
(4) The arbitral tribunal may, in either of the cases referred 
to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), admit a later plea 
if it considers the delay justified. 
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to 
in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) and, where the arbitral 
tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea, continue with 
the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award. 
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make 
an application for setting aside such an arbitral award in 
accordance with section 34.”
25.	 In re Interplay (supra), this Court held as follows: -
“123. The doctrine of kompetenz-kompetenz (also known 
as competence-competence), as originally developed 

22
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in Germany, was traditionally understood to imply that 
arbitrators are empowered to make a final ruling on their 
own jurisdiction, with no subsequent judicial review of the 
decision by any court. [ Fouchard, Gaillard, Goldman on 
International Commercial Arbitration, Emmanuel Gaillard 
and John Savage (Eds.), (1999) 396.] However, many 
jurisdictions allow an Arbitral Tribunal to render a decision 
on its jurisdiction, subject to substantive judicial review. 
[Gary Born, International Arbitration Law and Practice (3rd 
Edn., 2021) 1143.]
124. It is a well-recognised principle of public international 
law that a legal authority possessing adjudicatory powers 
has the right to decide its own jurisdiction. [Interpretation 
of the Greco-Turkish Agreement of December 1st, 1926, 
In re, 1928 SCC OnLine PCIJ 5] Similarly, it is a general 
rule of international arbitration law that an Arbitral Tribunal 
has the power to determine its own jurisdiction. The ability 
of an Arbitral Tribunal to determine its own jurisdiction is 
an important facet of arbitration jurisprudence because it 
gives effect to the separability presumption. The separability 
presumption insulates the arbitration agreement from the 
defects of the underlying contract, and thereby ensures 
the sustenance of the tribunal’s jurisdiction over the 
substantive rights and obligations of the parties under the 
underlying contract even after such a contract is put to an 
end. The doctrine of competence-competence allows the 
tribunal to decide on all substantive issues arising out of 
the underlying contract, including the existence and validity 
of the arbitration agreement.”
26.	 For the reasons set out hereinabove, paragraph 40 of Central 
Warehousing (Supra) cannot be understood on the facts of the 
present case to mean that Clause 33 of the Leave and License 
Agreement has ceased to exist. 
27.	 We have been constrained to deal with the judgement in Central 
Warehousing (supra) only to decipher whether on account of the said 
judgement, Clause 33 of the Leave and License Agreement dated 
06.10.2017, in the present case, containing the arbitration clause is 
non-existent. We hold that it is not and that an examination under 
Section 11(6-A) indicates that there exists an arbitration agreement 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
23
Motilal Oswal Financial Services Limited v.  
Santosh Cordeiro and Another
between the parties. We are conscious that an appeal is pending 
in this Court against the judgement in Central Warehousing 
(supra). That appeal may be decided on its own merits and we are 
not to be taken to have pronounced on the correctness of Central 
Warehousing (supra) one way or the other. 
28.	 The appeal is dismissed for the reasons stated above. No order as 
to costs. The Arbitrator shall proceed with the adjudication of the 
disputes and conclude the proceedings within 6 months from today.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
