[2026] 1 S.C.R. 167 : 2026 INSC 25
The State (NCT) of Delhi 
v.
Khimji Bhai Jadeja
(Criminal Appeal No. 74 of 2026)
06 January 2026
[Sanjay Kumar* and Alok Aradhe, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the consolidation of FIRs; and whether or 
not the offences allegedly committed against the 1,852 complainants 
were part of the ‘same transaction’.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – ss. 218-223 – Consolidation/
clubbing of FIRs – FIR registered u/ss. 420 and 120B IPC that 
accused and his accomplices, including the respondent 
induced large number of people to invest their monies and 
duped them by falsely claiming to triple money in a few 
days – Investigation revealed that altogether 1,852 victims 
cheated to the tune of ₹46.40 crores – Other 1851 complaints 
clubbed with the aforesaid FIR and those complainants made 
witnesses by treating their complaints as statements – Bail 
applications by the respondent – Additional Sessions Judge 
framed three questions of law and referred them to the High 
Court for appropriate decision – Division Bench answered 
the reference holding that (a) such complaints could not be 
amalgamated into one FIR by treating all such complainants 
as witnesses therein; (b) that the police could not club 
separate offences investigated under separate FIRs into one 
final report and that a separate final report had to be filed 
in relation to each FIR; and (c) that it would be for the trial 
court to consider the sentence that could be imposed on a 
convicted accused – Challenge to:
Held:  Reference by the Additional Sessions Judge was premature, 
as the stage had not arisen for her to have entertained any 
doubt so as to raise the questions of law for the decision of the 
High Court – Investigation was still ongoing and it could not 
* Author

168
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
have been ascertained at that stage as to whether the alleged 
offences formed part and parcel of the same transaction – Even 
otherwise, consolidation of FIRs is permissible in law but that 
would have also depended upon the conclusions to be arrived 
at after the investigation – However, as on date, as many as six 
supplementary chargesheets have been filed during the pendency 
of this case, in addition to the main chargesheet that was filed 
in 2014 – End result of the investigation undertaken is that an 
offence u/s.120B IPC has been alleged – Thus, as a conspiracy 
is alleged, leading to multiple acts of cheating against different 
individuals, the course adopted by the Police in registering one FIR 
and treating the complaints received from 1851 other complainants 
as statements u/s.161 CrPC, was the correct course of action to 
have been adopted at that stage – Inference to be drawn from 
the chargesheets, left to the Magistrate concerned to consider, 
so as to ascertain whether the various acts of cheating attributed 
to the accused persons constitute part of the ‘same transaction’, 
thereby bringing them within the ambit of s.220(1) and s.223 (a) 
& (d) – If the offences formed part of the same transaction, the 
Magistrate would be entitled to charge and try them together, 
as enabled by the provisions, as it would be in the larger public 
interest to do so – Further, in such an event, the complainants, who 
would then be treated as witnesses in relation to the FIR which 
was first registered – For sentencing, the provisions of s.71 IPC 
along with ss.31 and 325 CrPC to be adhered to, depending upon 
the established facts and findings in the case – If, however, it is 
concluded that there are several transactions and distinct offences 
in relation to different victims, there have to be separate trials for 
each offence, subject to s.219 CrPC/ s.242 BNSS, which allows 
the trial court to try three/five offences of the same kind committed 
within a year – Thus, the judgment passed by the High Court set 
aside to that extent. [Paras 19-23] 
Case Law Cited
Amish Devgan v. Union of India and Others (2021) 1 SCC 1 - 
relied on.
State of Andhra Pradesh v. Cheemalapati Ganeswara Rao 
and Another [1964] 3 SCR 297 : AIR 1963 SC 1850; S. 
Swamirathnam v. State of Madras, AIR 1957 SC 340 : (1956) 2 
SCC 144; Banwarilal Jhunjhunwala and Others v. Union of India 
and Another [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 338 : AIR 1963 SC 1620 ; State 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
169
The State (NCT) of Delhi v. Khimji Bhai Jadeja
of Jharkhand through SP, Central Bureau of Investigation v. Lalu 
Prasad Yadav alias Lalu Prasad [2017] 3 SCR 630 : (2017) 8 
SCC 1; T.T. Antony v. State of Kerala and Others [2001] 3 SCR  
942 : (2001) 6 SCC 181; Arnab Ranjan Goswami v. Union of India 
and Others [2020] 8 SCR 222 : (2020) 14 SCC 12; Abhishek 
Singh Chauhan v. Union of India and Others, 2022 SCC OnLine 
SC 1936 Amanat Ali v. State of Karnataka and Others (2023) 14 
SCC 801 Ravinder Singh Sidhu v. State of Punjab and Others, 
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1164; Alok Kumar v. State of Bihar and 
Others, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1728; Satinder Singh Bhasin v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another (2023) 14 SCC 805; Radhey 
Shyam v. State of Haryana and Others, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 
1935; Amandeep Singh Saran v. State of Delhi and Others 2023 
SCC OnLine SC 1851; Narinderjit Singh Sahni and Another v. 
Union of India and Others [2001] Supp. 4 SCR 114 : (2002) 2 
SCC 210 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023; Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Consolidation of FIRs; Complainants part of the ‘same transaction’; 
Invest their monies and duped them by falsely claiming to triple 
money; Clubbing of FIRs; Complaints amalgamated into one 
FIR.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
74 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 08.07.2019 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in CRLR No. 1 of 2014
Appearances for Parties
R. Basant, Sr. Adv./A.C.
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Mrs. Aishwarya Bhati, A.S.G., Mukesh Kumar Maroria, Ms. 
Rekha Pandey, Ms. Priyanka Das, Ms. Vishakha, Ms. Chitrangda 
Rashtravara, Ms. Shreya Jain.

170
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Kumar, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The State (NCT) of Delhi is aggrieved by the judgment dated 
08.07.2019, whereby a Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi 
answered Criminal Reference No. 1 of 2014. By the said reference, 
the learned Additional District & Sessions Judge – II, North-West 
District, Rohini Courts, Delhi1, had referred three questions of law 
to the High Court of Delhi for its decision, under Section 395(2) 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732. The questions read as 
under: -
‘a. Whether in a case of inducement, allurement and 
cheating of large number of investors/depositors in 
pursuance to a criminal conspiracy, each deposit by an 
investor constitutes a separate and individual transaction 
or all such transactions can be amalgamated and clubbed 
into a single FIR by showing one investor as complainant 
and others as witnesses?
b. If in case the Hon’ble Court concludes that each deposit 
has to be treated as separate transaction, then how many 
such transactions can be amalgamated into one charge 
sheet?
(Note: - As per the provisions of Section 219 CrPC and 
as observed by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of 
Narinderjit Singh Sahni & anr. vs. Union of India & ors., 
only three transactions in a particular year can be clubbed 
in a single charge sheet).
c. Whether under the given circumstances the concept of 
maximum punishment of seven years for a single offence 
can be pressed into service by the accused by clubbing 
1	
For short, ‘Additional Sessions Judge’
2	
For short, ‘CrPC’

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
171
The State (NCT) of Delhi v. Khimji Bhai Jadeja
and amalgamating all the transactions into one FIR with 
maximum punishment of seven years?
(Note: - If this is done, this would be in violation of concept 
of Proportionality of Punishment as provided in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure. In the case of Narinderjit Singh 
Sahni vs. Union of India & ors., it has been observed by 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court that this cannot be done but 
in case if we go by the ratio laid down by the Delhi High 
Court in the case of State vs. Ramesh Chand Kapoor this 
is possible. Hence, this aspect requires an authoritative 
pronouncement by a larger Bench).’
3.	
The Division Bench answered the questions as follows: -
‘…. Thus, our answer to Question (a) is that in a case of 
inducement, allurement and cheating of large number of 
investors/depositors in pursuance to a criminal conspiracy, 
each deposit by an investor constitutes a separate and 
individual transaction. All such transactions cannot be 
amalgamated and clubbed into a single FIR by showing 
one investor as the complainant and others as witnesses. 
In respect of each such transaction, it is imperative for 
the State to register a separate FIR if the complainant 
discloses commission of a cognizable offence.
…. Thus, our answer to question (b) is that in respect of 
each FIR, a separate final report (and wherever necessary 
supplementary/further charge sheet(s)) have to be filed, 
and there is no question of amalgamation of the final 
reports that may be filed in respect of different FIRs. The 
amalgamation, strictly in terms of Section 219 Cr.P.C., 
would be considered by the Court/ Magistrate at the stage 
of framing of charge, since Section 219(1) mandates that 
where the requirements set out in the said Section are 
met, the accused “may be charged with, and tried at one 
trial for, any number of them not exceeding three”.
…. In our view, the aforesaid question [sic, (c)] does not 
survive in view of the answer to question (a) and (b). It 
would be for the Trial Court to consider the sentence to 
which the convict may be subjected as per law, keeping 

172
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in view the well settled principles of sentencing. In this 
regard, we may only refer to Section 31 of the Cr.P.C. 
which, inter alia, provides that when a person is convicted 
at one trial of two or more offences, the Court, may subject 
to the provisions of Section 71 IPC, sentence him for such 
offences to the several punishments prescribed therefore 
which such Court is competent to inflict. It further provides 
that such punishments, which consist of imprisonment, 
would commence one after the expiration of the other, 
unless the Court directs that such punishments shall run 
concurrently. The limitation on the quantum of sentence is 
prescribed by sub-section 2 of Section 31 of the Cr.P.C., 
but the same would apply in respect of convictions at one 
trial of two or more offences. However, where the trials are 
multiple, which result into multiple convictions, the proviso 
to Section 31 (2) would have no application.’
4.	
The State filed the present appeal assailing these answers. By order 
dated 25.11.2019, this Court stayed the operation of the impugned 
judgment. Mr. R. Basant, learned senior counsel, was requested 
to assist the Court as an amicus curiae. Despite service of notice, 
Khimji Bhai Jadeja, the respondent, did not enter appearance before 
this Court.
5.	
The reference by the learned Additional Sessions Judge arose in 
the context of FIR No. 89 of 2009 registered on 01.06.2009 by the 
Economic Offences Wing of the Delhi Police under Sections 420 and 
120B of the Indian Penal Code, 18603, at the behest of one Rajesh 
Kumar. His complaint was that Ashok Jadeja and his accomplices, 
one of whom was Khimji Bhai Jadeja, the respondent herein, had 
falsely represented that Ashok Jadeja was blessed with the divine 
power of Sikotar Mata to triple money in a few days. A large number 
of people were stated to have been induced to invest their monies and 
were ultimately duped. During the investigation into this complaint, 
it was found that altogether 1,852 victims had been cheated of their 
monies, to the tune of ₹46.40 crores. The other 1851 complaints 
were clubbed with FIR No. 89 of 2009 and those complainants 
were made witnesses by treating their complaints as statements. 
3	
For short, ‘IPC’

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
173
The State (NCT) of Delhi v. Khimji Bhai Jadeja
On 09.02.2014, the Delhi Police filed a charge sheet against 15 
persons. Six more supplementary charge sheets came to be filed 
between 2014 and 2025. Meanwhile, when Khimji Bhai Jadeja, the 
respondent herein, filed a petition in 2014 seeking bail, the learned 
Additional Sessions Judge framed the aforestated three questions 
of law, vide order dated 14.03.2014, and referred them to the High 
Court for appropriate decision under Section 395(2) CrPC, leading 
to that reference being answered by way of the impugned judgment.
6.	
The Division Bench of the High Court was of the opinion that registering 
a single FIR and treating the other complainants as witnesses would 
result in deprivation of the rights of such complainants to pursue their 
individual complaints. The Bench conceded that they could, at the 
most, be treated as witnesses to establish the criminal conspiracy, 
but treating them only as witnesses would deprive them of the right 
to file protest petitions in the event a closure report was filed by 
the police in the sole FIR that was registered or if the Magistrate 
concerned did not accept the final report and discharged the accused. 
It was on this basis that the Division Bench answered question (a) 
by concluding that such complaints could not be amalgamated into 
one FIR by treating all such complainants as witnesses therein. 
Apropos question (b), the Bench opined that the police could not 
club separate offences investigated under separate FIRs into one 
final report and that a separate final report had to be filed in relation 
to each FIR. Referring to Section 219 CrPC, the Bench opined that 
amalgamation thereunder could be considered by the Magistrate 
concerned at the stage of framing of charges, upto a maximum of 
three. As regards question (c), the Bench opined that it would be for 
the Trial Court to consider the sentence that could be imposed on a 
convicted accused in accordance with the well-settled principles of 
sentencing and the legal provisions relevant thereto.
7.	
The learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing for the appellant-
State, would contend that a conspiracy to procure deposits from 
several persons so as to dupe them would be a ‘single transaction’, 
irrespective of the number of people defrauded and each such 
transaction ought not to be treated as a separate offence, requiring 
an individual FIR to be registered therefor. She would argue that 
clubbing of FIRs is permissible in law and that requiring individual 
FIRs to be registered in a case of this nature would be cumbersome 
and wholly unnecessary. She would point out that the statute 

174
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
provides for charges being consolidated against multiple persons for 
multiple offences, if such offences form part of the same transaction. 
Reliance is placed upon State of Andhra Pradesh vs. Cheemalapati 
Ganeswara Rao and another4, wherein this Court observed thus: 
“where several acts committed by a person show a unity of purpose 
or design, that would be a strong circumstance to indicate that those 
acts form part of the same transaction.” She would argue that the 
acts of the accused persons in the case on hand also constitute a 
‘single transaction’, justifying the clubbing of all the complaints with 
the first FIR. Lastly, she would assert that requiring registration of 
individual FIRs for each such complaint would lead to multiplicity of 
proceedings, which would be violative of public policy, and would also 
increase the burden upon the prosecution as well as the judiciary. 
8.	
Mr. R. Basant, learned amicus curiae, made detailed submissions 
on all aspects of the matter. He would state that the reference itself 
was premature, as the investigation was still pending and the police 
were yet to determine whether all the alleged acts of cheating were 
part of the same transaction, falling within the ambit of Section 220(1) 
CrPC and Section 223(a) and (d) CrPC. He would further state that, 
perusal of the allegations in FIR No. 89 of 2009 manifests that a 
single conspiracy was alleged and, therefore, the course adopted 
by the Delhi Police in registering one single FIR was appropriate. 
He would point out that even if multiple FIRs had been registered, 
consolidation of such FIRs is permissible in law, as was pointed out 
by this Court time and again. He would submit that no exception could 
be taken to the registration of one FIR and treating the complaints of 
the other victims as part of the investigation in the said FIR. Referring 
to the charge sheets filed by the Delhi Police in the present case, the 
learned amicus would point out that general allegations were made 
therein that a criminal conspiracy was hatched, thereby attracting 
Section 120B IPC. In summation, he would submit that the answers 
by the Division Bench of the High Court to questions (a) and (b) 
are incorrect. He would assert that, as to whether consolidation of 
charges can be effected or not is a question that would arise for 
consideration only at the stage of framing of charges and if the 
alleged offences formed part of the same transaction, whatever be 
the number of complainants, such consolidation is permissible under 
4	
[1964] 3 SCR 297 : AIR 1963 SC 1850 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
175
The State (NCT) of Delhi v. Khimji Bhai Jadeja
the provisions of the statute and, if not, separate charges would have 
to be framed, subject to Section 219 CrPC.
9.	
The issue, therefore, boils down to whether or not the offences 
allegedly committed against the 1,852 complainants were part of 
the ‘same transaction’. We may first note the case law that has 
developed over time on the issue of consolidation of FIRs. In S. 
Swamirathnam vs. State of Madras5, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court 
rejected the contention of the accused that there was misjoinder of 
charges as several conspiracies, distinct from each other, had been 
lumped together and tried at one trial. The Bench observed that the 
charges, as framed, disclosed one single conspiracy spread over 
several years and the only object of the conspiracy was to cheat 
members of the public. Per the Bench, the mere fact that others 
joined in the conspiracy in the course of those years or the fact that 
several incidents of cheating took place pursuant to the conspiracy 
did not change the conspiracy or split it up into several conspiracies. 
It was held that the instances of cheating were in pursuance of one 
conspiracy and were, therefore, parts of the same transaction.
10.	 In Banwarilal Jhunjhunwala and others vs. Union of India and 
another6, this Court dealt with the question as to what is meant by 
‘every distinct offence’. It was held that ‘distinct’ meant ‘not identical’ 
and two offences would be distinct if they are not, in any way, inter-
related. It was further held that if there is some inter-relation, there 
would be no distinctness and it would depend upon the circumstances 
of the case in which the offences were committed whether there be 
separate charges for those offences or not.
11.	 In Cheemalapati Ganeswara Rao (supra), a 3-Judge Bench of 
this Court observed that, what is to be ascertained under Section 
235(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (equivalent to 
Section 218(1) CrPC), was whether the offences arise out of acts 
so connected together as to form the same transaction. It was noted 
that ‘same transaction’ is not defined anywhere in the 1898 Code 
and it was held that whether transactions can be regarded as the 
same transaction would necessarily depend upon the particular facts 
of each case. The Bench noted that the general thought is that, 
5	
(1956) 2 SCC 144 : AIR 1957 SC 340 
6	
[1963] Supp. 2 SCR 338 : AIR 1963 SC 1620

176
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
where there is proximity of time or place or unity of purpose and 
design or continuity of action in respect of a series of acts, it may 
be possible to infer that they form part of the same transaction. The 
Bench, however, cautioned that it is not necessary that every one of 
these elements should co-exist for transactions to be regarded as 
the same transaction and elaborated that if several acts committed 
by a person show a unity of purpose or design, then it may be a 
strong circumstance to indicate that those acts form part of the same 
transaction. Noting that a transaction may consist of an isolated act 
or a series of acts, the Bench held that such series of acts must, of 
necessity, be connected with one another and if some of them stand 
out independently, they would not form part of the same transaction 
but would constitute a different transaction. It was concluded that the 
‘same transaction’ means a transaction consisting either of a single 
act or of a series of connected acts.
12.	 In State of Jharkhand through SP, Central Bureau of Investigation 
vs. Lalu Prasad Yadav alias Lalu Prasad7, this Court observed that 
even if the modus operandi is the same, it would not make it a single 
offence when the offences are separate. This Court held that, if a 
conspiracy is furthered into several distinct offences, there have to be 
separate trials. Illustrating the point, it was observed there may be a 
situation where, in furtherance of a general conspiracy, offences take 
place in different parts of the country, leading to several persons being 
killed at different times and, in such a situation, each trial would have 
to be held separately so that the accused are punished separately 
for each offence committed in furtherance of the conspiracy. It was 
pointed out if there is only one trial for such a conspiracy, in spite 
of separate offences being committed, it would enable the accused 
to go scot-free, despite committing a number of offences, which is 
not the intendment of law.
13.	 In Amish Devgan vs. Union of India and others8, seven FIRs came 
to be registered in the States of Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Telangana 
and Uttar Pradesh in relation to a television telecast, which formed 
the basis for the offences alleged. Applying the law laid down in T.T. 
7	
(2017) 8 SCC 1
8	
(2021) 1 SCC 1

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
177
The State (NCT) of Delhi v. Khimji Bhai Jadeja
Antony vs. State of Kerala and others9, which was followed thereafter 
in Arnab Ranjan Goswami vs. Union of India and others10, this Court 
directed the clubbing of the FIRs. It was observed that, when the 
subject matter of the FIRs is the same incident or occurrence or 
is in regard to incidents, which are two or more parts of the same 
transaction, then a separate and second FIR need not be proceeded 
with. It was observed that, in terms of the law laid down in T.T. Antony 
(supra), the subsequent FIRs would be treated as statements under 
Section 161 CrPC. It was held that it would be open to the other 
complainants to file protest petitions in case a closure report was 
filed by the police. It was observed that upon filing of such protest 
petitions, the Magistrate is obliged to consider the contentions urged; 
even reject the closure report and take cognizance of the offence 
as, otherwise, such complainants would face difficulty in contesting 
the closure report, even if there is enough material to make out a 
case of commission of the offence. 
14.	 In Abhishek Singh Chauhan vs. Union of India and others11, this Court 
again followed the exposition in Amish Devgan (supra) and deemed 
it appropriate to exercise power under Article 142 of the Constitution 
to direct clubbing of all the FIRs in different States so that they could 
proceed together to a single trial, as far as possible. This measure 
was adopted with the consent of all the concerned States.
15.	 In T.T. Antony (supra), this Court observed that there can be 
no second FIR in relation to the same cognizable offence and, 
consequently, there can be no fresh investigation on receipt of every 
subsequent information in respect of the same cognizable offence or 
same occurrence or incident, giving rise to one or more cognizable 
offences. It was observed that, on receipt of information about a 
cognizable offence or any incident giving rise to a cognizable offence 
or offences and on entering the FIR in the Station House Diary, the 
officer in charge of the police station has to investigate not merely the 
cognizable offence reported in the FIR, but also any other connected 
offences that may be found to have been committed. In this regard, 
it was specifically observed as under:
9	
(2001) 6 SCC 181
10	
(2020) 14 SCC 12
11	
2022 SCC OnLine SC 1936

178
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
‘18. …….. All other information made orally or in writing 
after the commencement of the investigation into the 
cognizable offence disclosed from the facts mentioned in 
the first information report and entered in the station house 
diary by the police officer or such other cognizable offence 
as may come to his notice during the investigation, will 
be statements falling under Section 162 CrPC. No such 
information/statement can properly be treated as an FIR 
and entered in the station house diary again, as it would 
in effect be a second FIR and the same cannot be in 
conformity with the scheme of CrPC.’ 
16.	 In Amanat Ali vs. State of Karnataka and others12, following the ratio 
decidendi in Amish Devgan (supra), this Court exercised power under 
Article 142 of the Constitution and consolidated six FIRs registered 
in the State to be tried together, as multiplicity of proceedings would 
not be in the larger public interest or in the interest of the State. 
Again, in Ravinder Singh Sidhu vs. State of Punjab and others13, 
this Court observed that it is now fairly well settled that multiplicity of 
proceedings would not be in the larger public interest and the correct 
course of action would be to merge the later FIRs with the earliest 
FIR with the State’s consent. On the same lines, in Alok Kumar 
vs. State of Bihar and others14, this Court noted that 81 FIRs were 
registered and directed the first FIR to be treated as the main FIR 
and all other FIRs to be treated as statements under Section 161 
CrPC. Earlier, in Satinder Singh Bhasin vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 
and another15, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court followed the principle 
enunciated in Amish Devgan (supra) and clubbed, with consent, 
the 118 FIRs relating to the Bike Bot scheme registered across the 
State of Uttar Pradesh and one FIR registered by the Economic 
Offences Wing, New Delhi, by exercising power under Article 142 of 
the Constitution. Before that, in Radhey Shyam vs. State of Haryana 
and others16, the very same 3-Judge Bench took note of multiple 
FIRs in connection with a network marketing scheme in as many 
12	
(2023) 14 SCC 801
13	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1164
14	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1728
15	
(2023) 14 SCC 805
16	
2022 SCC OnLine SC 1935

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
179
The State (NCT) of Delhi v. Khimji Bhai Jadeja
as 12 States and directed the clubbing of all the FIRs, which could 
thereafter proceed to one trial as far as possible, duly noting that all 
the States concerned voiced no objection to such course of action. 
17.	 However, in Amandeep Singh Saran vs. State of Delhi and others17, 
this Court refused to consolidate the FIRs registered against the 
petitioner therein in different States, not only under the provisions 
of the IPC but also invoking respective State enactments for which 
Special Courts were designated to try the offences thereunder, on the 
ground that clubbing of such FIRs would mean that the jurisdiction of 
such Special Courts would be taken away and a special jurisdiction 
would be conferred on that one Court where the FIRs were clubbed 
to try offences arising under different State enactments. 
18.	 We must also refer to Narinderjit Singh Sahni and another vs. Union 
of India and others18, a decision that weighed heavily with the High 
Court in answering the reference. Therein, a 3-Judge Bench of this 
Court dealt with a case involving 250 FIRs registered throughout the 
country. The argument before this Court was that they constituted a 
single offence or, in the alternative, an offence which could only have 
been committed in the course of the same transaction. Dealing with 
this argument, the Bench observed that the fact situation did not permit 
any credence being given to the submission that the FIRs pertained 
to a single offence. It was held that each individual deposit agreement 
had to be treated as a separate and individual transaction brought 
about by the allurement of the financial companies, since the parties 
were different, the amount of deposit was different as also the period 
for which the deposit was made. The Bench, therefore, observed that 
all the characteristics of independent transactions were there and it 
did not see any compelling reason to hold otherwise. However, we 
may note, with all due respect, that there was no in-depth analysis 
of statutory provisions or case law in the context of commission of 
offences in the course of the same transaction, whereby persons 
accused of multiple offences committed in the course of that same 
transaction could be charged and tried together. In any event, the 
development of law on the point, referred to hereinabove, including 
later decisions of 3-Judge Benches, is indicative of the legal position 
17	
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1851
18	
(2002) 2 SCC 210

180
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
prevailing as on date. The above referred judgments sum up the 
legal position adequately and we see no purpose in burdening this 
decision with more case law on the point. 
19.	 We may note that Section 218(1) CrPC requires a distinct and 
separate charge for every distinct offence and each such separate 
charge should be tried separately. Sections 219 to 223 CrPC constitute 
exceptions to this general rule and stipulate the circumstances in 
which deviation therefrom can be made. Under Section 219 CrPC, 
three such offences committed during a year can be the subject matter 
of a single trial [now, five such offences, under Section 242 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (BNSS)]. Under Sections 
220(1) CrPC and 223(a) and (d) CrPC, consolidated charges can 
be framed against several accused persons in relation to several 
offences, if such offences are committed during the course of the 
same transaction. It would, therefore, turn upon the offences forming 
part of the ‘same transaction’.
20.	 As already noted hereinabove, precedential law has laid down triple 
tests, though not to be applied cumulatively, to decide when separate 
actions can be treated as part of the ‘same transaction’ – 1) unity of 
purpose and design; 2) proximity of time and place; and 3) continuity 
of action. These tests may be applied to ascertain whether a series 
of acts form part of the same transaction or not. It is not necessary 
at the present stage to consider whether consolidation of charges 
under Section 220(1) CrPC should be resorted to, as that would 
depend upon the opinion of the Magistrate on the strength of the 
findings recorded during the investigation. If it is opined that all the 
incidents partake of the same transaction, there can be one trial 
under Section 220(1) CrPC and Section 223(a) and (d) CrPC. If, 
however, it is concluded that there are several transactions and distinct 
offences in relation to different victims, there have to be separate 
trials for each offence, subject to Section 219 CrPC/ Section 242 
BNSS, which allows the Trial Court to try three/five offences of the 
same kind committed within a year. Once all the incidents are taken 
to be part of the same transaction and amalgamated into one FIR, 
the punishment would follow accordingly as per law. 
21.	 We agree with the learned amicus that the reference by the learned 
Additional Sessions Judge was premature, as the stage had not arisen 
for her to have entertained any doubt so as to raise the questions of 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
181
The State (NCT) of Delhi v. Khimji Bhai Jadeja
law that she did for the decision of the High Court. The investigation 
was still ongoing and it could not have been ascertained at that stage 
as to whether the alleged offences formed part and parcel of the same 
transaction. Even otherwise, consolidation of FIRs is permissible in 
law but that would have also depended upon the conclusions to be 
arrived at after the investigation. However, as on date, as many as 
six supplementary chargesheets have been filed during the pendency 
of this case, in addition to the main chargesheet that was filed in the 
year 2014. We find that the end result of the investigation undertaken 
is that an offence under Section 120B IPC has been alleged, i.e., a 
criminal conspiracy. Therefore, as a conspiracy is alleged, leading 
to multiple acts of cheating against different individuals, the course 
adopted by the Delhi Police in registering one FIR and treating the 
complaints received from 1851 other complainants as statements 
under Section 161 CrPC, was the correct course of action to have 
been adopted at that stage. 
22.	 The inference to be drawn from the chargesheets, as filed, is left to 
the Magistrate concerned to consider, so as to ascertain whether 
the various acts of cheating attributed to the accused persons 
constitute part of the ‘same transaction’, thereby bringing them within 
the ambit of Section 220(1) CrPC and Section 223 (a) & (d) CrPC. 
If the offences formed part of the same transaction, the Magistrate 
would be entitled to charge and try them together, as enabled by the 
aforestated provisions, as it would be in the larger public interest to 
do so. Further, in such an event, as pointed out in Amish Devgan 
(supra), the complainants, who would then be treated as witnesses in 
relation to the FIR which was first registered, would be entitled to file 
protest petitions in the event of a closure report being filed or if the 
Magistrate is inclined to discharge the accused, and the Magistrate 
concerned is bound to consider the same on merits. Coming to the 
aspect of sentencing, the provisions of Section 71 IPC along with 
Sections 31 and 325 CrPC would have to be adhered to, depending 
upon the established facts and findings in the case. 
23.	 Viewed thus, we set aside the answers on questions (a) & (b) by the 
Division Bench of the High Court. The judgment dated 08.07.2019 
passed by the High Court of Delhi in Criminal Reference No. 1 of 
2014 is, accordingly, set aside to that extent. 	
The appeal is allowed in the aforestated terms. 

182
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Before, we part with the case, we would like to place on record 
our appreciation and gratitude for the able and erudite assistance 
rendered by Mr. R Basant, learned amicus curiae. 	
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
