[2026] 1 S.C.R. 191 : 2026 INSC 31
The Karnataka Lokayuktha Bagalkote District, Bagalkot 
v.
Chandrashekar & Anr. 
(Criminal Appeal No. 77 of 2026)
06 January 2026
[Ahsanuddin Amanullah and K. Vinod Chandran,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether present is a case where the criminal proceedings can be 
quashed on the exoneration of the respondent-delinquent employee 
in the departmental enquiry or they be permitted to continue.
Headnotes†
Disciplinary enquiry vis-à-vis criminal prosecution – Criminal 
proceedings when cannot be quashed on the exoneration 
of the delinquent employee in the departmental enquiry – 
Respondent, an Executive Engineer (Electrical) was alleged 
to have demanded a bribe from an electrical contractor  – 
Contractor complained to the Anti-Corruption Bureau 
who prepared a trap which was successful – Disciplinary 
proceedings initiated by the department, criminal prosecution 
launched by the appellant-Lokayukta – Since the departmental 
proceedings ended in exoneration, the Respondent approached 
the High Court for quashing the criminal proceedings – High 
Court held that if there is an exoneration on merits where the 
allegation is found to be not sustainable at all and the person 
held innocent, then criminal proceedings on the same set 
of facts and circumstances cannot be allowed to continue – 
Interference with: 
Held: Exoneration is not on merits – Enquiry Report found that 
for reason of the Officer in charge of the trap having not been 
examined, the department was unable to establish the charge, 
which is not at all an exoneration on merits, but more of a 
discharge for lack of diligence – Even without the examination of 
the Inspector who laid the trap there was sufficient proof on the 
standard of preponderance of probabilities to find the delinquent 
guilty of the charge of demand and acceptance of bribe – The 
complainant and the independent witnesses have spoken about 
* Author

192
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the incident of the successful trap laid – Enquiry Officer fell into 
an error by requiring proof at a higher level than that necessary 
under preponderance of probabilities and so did the Disciplinary 
Authority, in concurring with the same – Present is not a fit case 
where the criminal proceedings can be quashed on the exoneration 
of the delinquent employee in a departmental enquiry – Criminal 
proceedings to continue. [Paras 8, 11, 15, 18]
Disciplinary enquiry vis-à-vis criminal prosecution – Both are 
independent of each other:
Held: In a disciplinary enquiry the employer satisfies itself as to 
whether the misconduct alleged is proved and if proved, decides 
on the proportionate punishment that should be imposed; both 
of which are in the exclusive domain of the employer, to be 
determined on the standard of preponderance of probabilities – In 
a criminal prosecution launched what assumes significance is the 
criminality of the act complained of or detected which has to be 
proved beyond reasonable doubt – Both are independent of each 
other not only for reason of the nature of the proceedings and the 
standard of proof, but also for reason of the adjudication being 
carried on by two different entities, regulated by a different set of 
rules and more importantly decided on the basis of the evidence 
led in the independent proceedings – If evidence is not led properly 
in one case, it cannot govern the decision in the other case where 
evidence is led separately and independently. [Para 9]
Disciplinary enquiry vis-à-vis criminal prosecution – Presence 
of a witness – No consequence in not responding to a 
summons in departmental proceedings, unlike in criminal 
proceedings:
Held: The exoneration was on the basis of two aspects, one, the 
Inspector of the ACB who carried out the trap having not been 
examined and the other, two independent witnesses accompanying 
the trap team having stated that they were standing outside the office 
room wherein the handing over of the bribe took place – The first 
ground of the Inspector not having been examined based on the 
preponderance of probabilities, is not imperative, especially when 
the two independent witnesses were examined – More so, insofar 
as the department not being at fault since three summons were 
taken out and a further request was made again for summoning the 
witness, which was declined by the Enquiry Officer – There would 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
193
The Karnataka Lokayuktha Bagalkote District, Bagalkot v.  
Chandrashekar & Anr.
be no consequence in not responding to a summons in departmental 
proceedings, while a like failure in criminal proceedings would be 
more drastic – The criminal court has ample powers to ensure the 
presence of a witness in a criminal proceeding, which the Enquiry 
Officer does not possess – The prosecuting agency and the one 
carrying on the departmental enquiry are two different entities – The 
trap was laid by the ACB, and the prosecution was conducted at the 
behest of the Lokayukta, and no laxity on the prosecuting agency 
can be presumed or anticipated of not bringing the Inspector to the 
box, before the criminal court – Moreover, the prosecution cannot 
be put an end on such anticipated laxity. [Para 21]
Disciplinary enquiry – Enquiry officer vis-à-vis disciplinary 
authority:
Held: Enquiry report in disciplinary proceedings is not conclusive 
of the guilt or otherwise of the delinquent employee, which finding 
is in the exclusive domain of the disciplinary authority – The 
enquiry officer is appointed only as a convenient measure to bring 
on record the allegations against the delinquent employee and 
the proof thereof and to ensure an opportunity to the delinquent 
employee to contest and defend the same by cross-examination of 
the witnesses proffered by the department and even production of 
further evidence, in defense – The enquiry officer merely records 
the evidence and the finding entered on the basis of the evidence 
led at the enquiry does not have any bearing on the final decision 
of the disciplinary authority – The disciplinary authority takes the 
ultimate call as to whether to concur with the findings of the enquiry 
authority or to differ therefrom – On a decision being taken to 
differ from the findings in the enquiry report as to the guilt of the 
delinquent employee, if it is in favour of the delinquent employee 
nothing more needs to be done since the enquiry stands closed 
exonerating the employee of the charges levelled – If the decision 
is to concur with the finding of guilt by the Enquiry Officer, then 
a show-cause is issued with the copy of the Enquiry Report – 
However, while differing from the finding of exoneration in the 
enquiry report, necessarily the disciplinary authority will not only 
have to issue a show-cause against the delinquent employee, with 
a copy of the Enquiry Report, but the show cause notice also has 
to specifically bring to attention of the delinquent, the aspects on 
which the disciplinary authority proposes to differ, based on the facts 
discovered in the enquiry so as to afford the delinquent employee 
an opportunity to proffer his defense to the same. [Para 14]

194
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Disciplinary enquiry – Enquiry officer:
Held: Enquiry Officer often is appointed as an independent person 
who would have no connection with the management to ensure 
against any allegation of bias – A retired judicial officer being 
appointed as an enquiry officer does not confer the enquiry report 
any higher value or greater sanctity than that is normally available 
to such reports. [Para 15]
Case Law Cited
Radheshyam Kejriwal v. State of W.B. [2011] 4 SCR 889 : (2011) 
3 SCC 581 – distinguished. 
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Ajay Kumar Tyagi [2012] 8 SCR 208 : 
(2012) 9 SCC 685 – held applicable.
P.S. Rajya v. State of Bihar [1996] Supp. 2 SCR 631 : (1996) 9 
SCC 1; State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal [1992] Supp. 3 SCR 259 : 
(1992) Supp. 1 SCC 335; National Insurance Company Limited v. 
Pranay Sethi [2017] 13 SCR 100 : (2017) 16 SCC 680 – referred to.
List of Acts
Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984.
List of Keywords
Disciplinary enquiry; Criminal prosecution; Criminal proceedings 
cannot be quashed on exoneration of the delinquent employee 
in departmental enquiry; Exoneration not on merits; Not total 
exoneration on merits; Executive Engineer (Electrical); Allegation 
of demand and acceptance of bribe; Successful trap laid; Bribe 
demanded from electrical contractor; Karnataka Electricity 
Transmission Corporation Limited Regulations; Standard of 
preponderance of probabilities; Delinquent guilty of the charge of 
demand and acceptance of bribe; Anti- Corruption Bureau; Enquiry 
officer; Disciplinary authority; Criminal proceedings to continue.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
77 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.01.2025 of the High Court 
of Karnataka Circuit Bench at Dharwad in WP No. 104828 of 2024

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
195
The Karnataka Lokayuktha Bagalkote District, Bagalkot v.  
Chandrashekar & Anr.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Vikram Hegde, Abhishek Wadiyar, Ashutosh Yadav.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Mehmood Umar Faruqui, Kartik Ganachari, Md. Zeeshan Ali, 
Mehfuz Basar Mollah.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J. 
Leave granted. 
2.	
Despite this Court having consistently held that disciplinary 
proceedings and criminal prosecution, even on an identical allegation, 
are parallel proceedings, the relevance of the conclusion in one is 
often contended to be binding on the other. Trite is the principle 
that in a disciplinary proceeding, the proof is of preponderance of 
probabilities while in a criminal proceeding, it has the higher standard 
of proof beyond reasonable doubt. Often it is argued that the acquittal 
in the criminal proceedings should inure to the benefit of the accused/
delinquent employee in a disciplinary proceeding too. In the present 
case, we have a contrary contention of the disciplinary proceedings 
having exonerated the delinquent employee, who seeks absolution 
from the criminal prosecution. The contention is that when the 
allegations could not be proved in a disciplinary proceeding where 
the requirement is only of preponderance of probabilities, surely it 
cannot be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
3.	
The appellant is the Lokayukta of the State of Karnataka, an 
independent body tasked also to conduct enquiries on complaints 
of corruption and initiate and continue prosecution; such powers 
having been statutorily conferred under the Karnataka Lokayukta 
Act, 1984. On facts, suffice it to notice that the respondent, an 
Executive Engineer (Electrical) with the Works and Maintenance 
Division, HESCOM, Bagalkot regulated by the Karnataka Electricity 
Transmission Corporation Limited Regulations, was alleged to have 
demanded a bribe from an electrical contractor to clear five bills, at 
the rate of Rupees two thousand each. The contractor complained 

196
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to the Anti-Corruption Bureau1 who prepared a trap, with identifiable, 
powdered notes kept in a packet entrusted with the complainant, to be 
handed over to the Executive Engineer. The trap was successful, and 
the notes were recovered from the pocket of the Executive Engineer 
whose hands turned pink on dipping in the prepared solution, which 
proved the taint of corruption. 
4.	
Disciplinary proceedings were initiated and so was criminal 
prosecution launched, the former by the department itself and the 
latter by the Lokayukta who is the appellant herein. On the claim that 
the departmental proceedings ended in exoneration, the delinquent 
employee approached the High Court, for quashing the criminal 
proceedings. The High Court by the impugned judgment relied on 
Radheshyam Kejriwal v. State of W.B.2, a three-Judge Bench 
decision to hold that if there is an exoneration on merits where 
the allegation is found to be not sustainable at all and the person 
held innocent, then criminal proceedings on the same set of facts 
and circumstances cannot be allowed to continue especially based 
on the principle of higher standard of proof in criminal cases. The 
learned Single Judge also refused to follow a later judgment of this 
Court in State (NCT of Delhi) v. Ajay Kumar Tyagi3; finding the 
later judgment to be per incuriam, having been passed in ignorance 
of the earlier one. 
5.	
There can be no doubt regarding the principle that if the later Bench 
holds contrary to the earlier Bench decision of coequal strength, on 
the same point, the contrary dictum expressed by the later Bench 
would be per incuriam as held by a Constitution Bench in National 
Insurance Company Limited v. Pranay Sethi4. But the question 
arising herein is as to whether there was a conflict with the earlier 
and later judgments. 
6.	
In Radheshyam Kejriwal2, the raid on the premises of the appellant 
therein, by the Enforcement Directorate gave rise to proceedings 
under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 19735. Initially, a 
1	
for short, the ACB
2	
(2011) 3 SCC 581
3	
(2012) 9 SCC 685
4	
(2017) 16 SCC 680
5	
for short, the FERA

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
197
The Karnataka Lokayuktha Bagalkote District, Bagalkot v.  
Chandrashekar & Anr.
show-cause notice was issued by the Director of the Enforcement 
Directorate proposing adjudication proceedings under Section 51 
of the FERA, which, after explanation received was concluded with 
a decision taken by the Adjudicating Officer that the contravention 
of the provisions alleged cannot be sustained since the transaction 
itself is not proved. The said order became final for reason of 
the Enforcement Directorate having not challenged it. Later, on 
the same set of facts, as enabled under Section 56 of the FERA 
criminal proceedings were initiated, which even as per the enactment 
could be continued without any prejudice to any award of penalty 
by the Adjudicating Officer under Section 51 of the FERA. It is in 
this context that the three-Judge Bench, by a majority, held inter 
alia that though the adjudication and criminal proceedings are 
independent of each other, if in the former the offender is exonerated 
on merits then the criminal prosecution also comes to an inevitable 
end. It was also categorically found that if the exoneration in the 
adjudication proceeding is on a technical ground and not on merits, 
the prosecution could continue. 
7.	
In Radheshyam Kejriwal2 the adjudication proceedings and the 
criminal proceedings were under the FERA, one for penalty; to 
recoup the economic loss caused by the transaction contravening 
the provisions of the statute and the other, prosecution; to provide 
penal consequences as a deterrent measure. The subject matter of 
the offence alleged in both proceedings was the contravention of 
the provisions of the statute through the transaction detected. When 
the adjudication proceedings found the transaction alleged to have 
not taken place, then it cuts at the root of the prosecution too. Other 
decisions under the FERA, where the two proceedings of adjudication 
and prosecution were found to be independent; the decision in one 
having no bearing on the other, were noticed. So were the decisions 
under the Income Tax Act, 19616 noticed, wherein, when the penalty 
imposed on a presumed violation of the provisions of the I.T. Act 
was set aside by the Tribunal; the last fact-finding authority under 
the scheme of the I.T. Act, for that reason alone the prosecution was 
found redundant and quashed. Radheshyam Kejriwal2 culled out 
the principles in the following manner:
6	
For brevity ‘the I.T. Act’

198
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
38. The ratio which can be culled out from these decisions 
can broadly be stated as follows:
(i) Adjudication proceedings and criminal prosecution can 
be launched simultaneously;
(ii) Decision in adjudication proceedings is not necessary 
before initiating criminal prosecution;
(iii) Adjudication proceedings and criminal proceedings 
are independent in nature to each other;
(iv) The finding against the person facing prosecution in the 
adjudication proceedings is not binding on the proceeding 
for criminal prosecution;
(v) Adjudication proceedings by the Enforcement 
Directorate is not prosecution by a competent court of law 
to attract the provisions of Article 20(2) of the Constitution 
or Section 300 of the Code of Criminal Procedure;
(vi) The finding in the adjudication proceedings in favour 
of the person facing trial for identical violation will depend 
upon the nature of finding. If the exoneration in adjudication 
proceedings is on technical ground and not on merit, 
prosecution may continue; and
(vii) In case of exoneration, however, on merits where the 
allegation is found to be not sustainable at all and the 
person held innocent, criminal prosecution on the same set 
of facts and circumstances cannot be allowed to continue, 
the underlying principle being the higher standard of proof 
in criminal cases.
39. In our opinion, therefore, the yardstick would be to 
judge as to whether the allegation in the adjudication 
proceedings as well as the proceeding for prosecution 
is identical and the exoneration of the person concerned 
in the adjudication proceedings is on merits. In case it 
is found on merit that there is no contravention of the 
provisions of the Act in the adjudication proceedings, the 
trial of the person concerned shall be an abuse of the 
process of the court.
[underlining by us for emphasis]

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
199
The Karnataka Lokayuktha Bagalkote District, Bagalkot v.  
Chandrashekar & Anr.
8.	
In Radheshyam Kejriwal2 the very substratum of the allegation of 
violation of the provisions of FERA was found to be non-existent, an 
adjudication on merits that the transaction alleged had not occurred. 
In the instant case the Enquiry Report found that for reason of the 
Officer in charge of the trap having not been examined, the department 
was unable to establish the charge, not at all an exoneration on 
merits, but more a discharge for lack of diligence. The ratio decidendi 
of that case cannot be extended to every situation where a statute 
provides for a civil liability and a criminal liability, in which event 
Courts would be presuming what logically follows from the finding, 
without any application on the facts. 
9.	
In a disciplinary enquiry the employer satisfies itself as to whether 
the misconduct alleged is proved and if proved, decides on the 
proportionate punishment that should be imposed; both of which are 
in the exclusive domain of the employer, to be determined on the 
standard of preponderance of probabilities. In a criminal prosecution 
launched what assumes significance is the criminality of the act 
complained of or detected which has to be proved beyond reasonable 
doubt. Both are independent of each other not only for reason of 
the nature of the proceedings and the standard of proof, but also for 
reason of the adjudication being carried on by two different entities, 
regulated by a different set of rules and more importantly decided 
on the basis of the evidence led in the independent proceedings. If 
evidence is not led properly in one case, it cannot govern the decision 
in the other case where evidence is led separately and independently.
10.	 No doubt, the principles in Radheshyam Kejriwal2 are applicable in 
a disciplinary inquiry, which was the specific question considered in 
Ajay Kumar Tyagi3; interestingly by the very same Hon’ble Judge 
who authored the majority judgment in Radheshyam Kejriwal2. True, 
the earlier decision was not noticed in the latter decision; according 
to us with just cause since there were distinctions on facts. 
11.	 Ajay Kumar Tyagi3 was a case in which a successful trap was laid 
and there was exoneration in the enquiry conducted without a final 
order by the Disciplinary Authority. Therein the Disciplinary Authority 
had not passed an order, in deference to the pending criminal 
prosecution, which action of deferment was unsuccessfully challenged 
in a writ petition by the delinquent. Then a further writ petition was 
filed challenging the continuance of the criminal prosecution on the 

200
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
ground of exoneration in the Enquiry Report, which stood allowed. 
The Disciplinary Authority then passed an order exonerating the 
delinquent, subject to a challenge to the quashing of the criminal 
proceedings. In the SLP filed against the order of quashing there 
was a reference to a larger Bench noting the divergence of opinion 
with regard to the quashing of a prosecution based on exoneration 
in a disciplinary proceeding. Even before answering the reference 
the larger Bench found the quashing to be wrong insofar as the 
Disciplinary Authority having power to differ from the findings in the 
report of enquiry and the High Court, in that case having upheld the 
action of the Disciplinary Authority, keeping in abeyance the final 
order. We pause here to notice that herein the Disciplinary Authority 
passed an order concurring with the findings in the Enquiry Report 
on 08.07.2024, produced as Annexure R-1, with a rider that the order 
is subject to the proceedings in the criminal case, the consequences 
of which would necessarily follow.
12.	 The reference too was answered in Ajay Kumar Tyagi3. A two-Judge 
Bench decision of this Court in P.S. Rajya v. State of Bihar7 was 
referred to wherein the criminal prosecution was quashed when the 
departmental proceedings concluded in exoneration. In P.S. Rajya7, 
the allegation was of possession of assets disproportionate to the 
source of income. The Central Vigilance Commission dealt with 
the charge and in its elaborate report concluded that the valuation 
report on which CBI placed reliance is of doubtful nature. The Court 
on facts found that the value given as a base for the chargesheet 
was not the value given in the reports subsequently given by the 
valuers. The decision in P.S. Rajya7 relying on State of Haryana v. 
Bhajan Lal8; the water shed decision in invocation of the inherent 
powers under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
for quashing criminal prosecution, held that the prosecution in that 
case should be quashed for more than one reason as laid down in 
Bhajan Lal8. Ajay Kumar Tyagi3 categorically held that the quashing 
of criminal proceedings in P.S. Rajya7 was not merely on account 
of the exoneration in the disciplinary proceedings. Referring to a 
number of decisions, it was held so in paragraphs 24 & 25 which 
are extracted hereunder:
7	
(1996) 9 SCC 1
8	
(1992) Supp. 1 SCC 335

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
201
The Karnataka Lokayuktha Bagalkote District, Bagalkot v.  
Chandrashekar & Anr.
“24. Therefore, in our opinion, the High Court quashed 
the prosecution on total misreading of the judgment in P.S. 
Rajya case (1996) 9 SCC 1. In fact, there are precedents, 
to which we have referred to above, that speak eloquently 
a contrary view i.e. exoneration in departmental proceeding 
ipso facto would not lead to exoneration or acquittal in a 
criminal case. On principle also, this view commends us. 
It is well settled that the standard of proof in a department 
proceeding is lower than that of criminal prosecution. It 
is equally well settled that the departmental proceeding 
or for that matter criminal cases have to be decided only 
on the basis of evidence adduced therein. Truthfulness 
of the evidence in the criminal case can be judged only 
after the evidence is adduced therein and the criminal 
case cannot be rejected on the basis of the evidence in 
the departmental proceeding or the report of the inquiry 
officer based on those evidence.
25. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the exoneration 
in the departmental proceeding ipso facto would not result 
in the quashing of the criminal prosecution. We hasten to 
add, however, that if the prosecution against an accused is 
solely based on a finding in a proceeding and that finding 
is set aside by the superior authority in the hierarchy, 
the very foundation goes and the prosecution may be 
quashed. But that principle will not apply in the case of 
the departmental proceeding as the criminal trial and the 
departmental proceeding are held by two different entities. 
Further, they are not in the same hierarchy.”
13.	 We are of the opinion that in the present case the distinction as 
brought out in Ajay Kumar Tyagi3 squarely applies and the ratio 
decidendi therein is not regulated by the ratio of the earlier judgment in 
Radheshyam Kejriwal2. In Radheshyam Kejriwal2, the adjudication 
proceedings and the prosecution were both by the very same entity, 
the Enforcement Directorate under the FERA. In Ajay Kumar Tyagi3, 
the allegation was of a demand and acceptance of bribe in which a 
trap was laid, and the prosecution was commenced and continued 
by the ACB while the departmental proceedings were by the Delhi 
Jal Board under which the delinquent employee worked. Identical is 
the fact in this case where the ACB laid the trap, commenced and 

202
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
continued the criminal proceedings, at the behest of the appellant, 
while the department carried on with the enquiry. The findings in 
the enquiry report also do not persuade us to quash the criminal 
proceedings as we would presently notice.
14.	 At the outset, we cannot but reiterate that the enquiry report in 
disciplinary proceedings is not conclusive of the guilt or otherwise 
of the delinquent employee, which finding is in the exclusive domain 
of the disciplinary authority. The enquiry officer is appointed only 
as a convenient measure to bring on record the allegations against 
the delinquent employee and the proof thereof and to ensure an 
opportunity to the delinquent employee to contest and defend 
the same by cross-examination of the witnesses proffered by the 
department and even production of further evidence, in defense. The 
enquiry officer, strictly speaking, merely records the evidence and 
the finding entered on the basis of the evidence led at the enquiry 
does not have any bearing on the final decision of the disciplinary 
authority. The disciplinary authority takes the ultimate call as to 
whether to concur with the findings of the enquiry authority or to differ 
therefrom. On a decision being taken to differ from the findings in 
the enquiry report as to the guilt of the delinquent employee, if it is 
in favour of the delinquent employee nothing more needs to be done 
since the enquiry stands closed exonerating the employee of the 
charges levelled. If the decision is to concur with the finding of guilt 
by the Enquiry Officer, then a show-cause is issued with the copy 
of the Enquiry Report. However, while differing from the finding of 
exoneration in the enquiry report, necessarily the disciplinary authority 
will not only have to issue a show-cause against the delinquent 
employee, with a copy of the Enquiry Report, but the show-cause 
notice also has to specifically bring to attention of the delinquent, the 
aspects on which the disciplinary authority proposes to differ, based 
on the facts discovered in the enquiry so as to afford the delinquent 
employee an opportunity to proffer his defense to the same. 
15.	 Having thus stated the law regulating the final decision in a 
departmental enquiry, we cannot but notice that in the present case, 
there is a final order produced as passed by the Disciplinary Authority. 
The learned Counsel for the respondent vehemently argued that a 
retired District Judge was the Enquiry Officer, which according to us 
gives the enquiry no higher sanctity than that would be conferred 
on any enquiry report in any disciplinary proceeding carried out by 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
203
The Karnataka Lokayuktha Bagalkote District, Bagalkot v.  
Chandrashekar & Anr.
a person not trained in law. The Enquiry Officer often is appointed 
as an independent person who would have no connection with the 
management to ensure against any allegation of bias. A retired 
judicial officer being appointed as an enquiry officer does not confer 
the enquiry report any higher value or greater sanctity than that is 
normally available to such reports. We cannot but observe that in 
this case the Enquiry Officer fell into an error by requiring proof at a 
higher level than that necessary under preponderance of probabilities 
and so did the Disciplinary Authority, in concurring with the same.
16.	 We also notice the specific findings in the enquiry report. The 
exoneration was on the basis of two aspects, one, the Inspector of 
the ACB who carried out the trap having not been examined and 
the other, two independent witnesses accompanying the trap team 
having stated that they were standing outside the office room wherein 
the handing over of the bribe took place. The first ground of the 
Inspector not having been examined, according to us, based on the 
preponderance of probabilities, is not imperative, especially when the 
two independent witnesses were examined. More so, insofar as the 
department not being at fault since three summons were taken out 
and a further request was made again for summoning the witness, 
which was declined by the Enquiry Officer. We cannot but notice that 
there would be no consequence in not responding to a summons in 
departmental proceedings, while a like failure in criminal proceedings 
would be more drastic. The criminal court has ample powers to 
ensure the presence of a witness in a criminal proceeding, which 
the Enquiry Officer does not possess. In this context, the fact that 
the prosecuting agency and the one carrying on the departmental 
enquiry being two entities assumes significance. Further, here the 
trap was laid by the ACB, and the prosecution was conducted at the 
behest of the Lokayukta, and we cannot presume or anticipate any 
laxity on the prosecuting agency of not bringing the Inspector to the 
box, before the criminal court. More pertinently we cannot, on such 
anticipated laxity put an end to the prosecution. 
17.	 We looked at the evidence laid at the enquiry, not to regulate the 
order in the departmental proceedings which is not challenged 
before us, but to satisfy ourselves and to understand whether there 
is total exoneration on merits, which we find to be absent. In the 
present case, the witnesses proffered by the department where, (i) 
the complainant; the contractor who complained of the demand of 

204
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
bribe and (ii) two independent witnesses, government officers in two 
different departments who accompanied the trap team. PW-1, the 
complainant categorically stated that a bribe was demanded from 
him of Rupees ten thousand to clear five bills at the rate of Rupees 
two thousand each. He complained to the ACB whose Inspector 
marked the notes, powdered them and put them in a packet, after 
noting down the numbers to later identify them. The trap team along 
with the complainant and two witnesses went to the office of the 
delinquent employee. The complainant went inside the office room 
wherein he handed over the packet containing the money to the 
delinquent employee, who counted and put it in his pant’s pocket, 
clearly spoken of by the complainant at the enquiry. The complainant 
gave the signal as agreed upon, a missed call on the mobile, when the 
trap team went in, checked the pockets of the delinquent employee, 
recovered the packet with the money and when the hands of the 
delinquent employee were dipped in the solution earlier prepared, 
the colour changed bringing forth the taint.
18.	 PW-2 and PW-3 were the independent witnesses who were standing 
outside the office room when the complainant went in. They deposed 
that on the signal being given, the officers went inside the room 
and the witnesses followed. They witnessed the money being taken 
out from the pocket of the delinquent and the delinquent’s hands 
being dipped in a solution which displayed the tainted colour. Even 
without the examination of the Inspector who laid the trap we are 
of the opinion that there was sufficient proof on the standard of 
preponderance of probabilities to find the delinquent guilty of the 
charge of demand and acceptance of bribe. The complainant and 
the independent witnesses have spoken about the incident of the 
successful trap laid. 
19.	 On the principles of law as stated hereinabove and also on the 
peculiar facts coming out from the above case, we are not convinced 
that this is a fit case where the criminal proceedings can be quashed 
on the exoneration of the delinquent employee in a departmental 
enquiry. We find the decision in Ajay Kumar Tyagi3 to be squarely 
applicable. The appeal stands allowed permitting the continuation 
of criminal proceedings. We make it clear that since the disciplinary 
authority has accepted the enquiry report, there cannot be reopening 
of the same based on the findings hereinabove; but a conviction 
in the criminal case would bring in consequences as mandated by 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
205
The Karnataka Lokayuktha Bagalkote District, Bagalkot v.  
Chandrashekar & Anr.
rules regulating the service, specifically reserved in the order of the 
disciplinary authority, Annexure R-1.
20.	 The Appeal stands allowed.
21.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
