[2026] 1 S.C.R. 141 : 2026 INSC 15
Union of India
v.
G. Kiran & Ors. 
(Civil Appeal No(s). 51 of 2026)
06 January 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari* and Vijay Bishnoi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether a reserved category candidate who availed relaxation 
while qualifying Preliminary Examination, though secured more 
marks than cut-off of the General Category candidate in the Main 
Examination and Interview for personality test and secured place in 
the final merit list, can be considered as ‘Insider General’ candidate 
for cadre allocation against an unreserved vacancy.
Headnotes†
The Rules for a competitive examination to be held by the 
Union Public Service Commission in 2013 (Exam Rules, 2013) – 
rr.1, 13, 14(ii), 17(1) – Vacancies in the Indian Forest Service 
(IFS) – Relaxation in qualifying marks at the preliminary stage – 
Relaxation/concession obtained in ‘eligibility’ or ‘selection 
criteria’, effect in the matter of cadre allocation – Respondent 
No.1, a reserved category candidate who availed relaxation in 
the Preliminary Examination but was placed higher in merit 
than the Respondent No.3-unreserved candidate in the final 
merit list based on total marks awarded in Main Examination 
(Written) and Personality Test, claimed to be treated as a 
General merit candidate for the purpose of cadre allocation 
against a General Insider vacancy for State of Karnataka in the 
IFS – OA allowed by the Tribunal holding that a meritorious 
SC candidate cannot be denied allocation against a General 
vacancy solely on the ground of availing relaxation in the SC 
cut-off marks at the stage of Preliminary Examination and 
directed to allocate the General Insider vacancy in the State of 
Karnataka to Respondent No.1, reserved category candidate – 
Writ petitions filed by Respondent No. 3 (who was allocated 
the General insider vacancy) and Union of India, dismissed by 
High Court, order of the Tribunal affirmed – Interference with:
* Author

142
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: Once relaxation has been taken by a reserved category 
candidate, they cannot be considered for unreserved vacancies – If 
a reserved category candidate takes benefit of relaxation though 
at initial stage, it will effectively amount to taking relaxation even 
at the final stage of the selection process because without giving 
relaxation to him, he was not in a position to participate in the 
Main examination and to set forth his claim of cadre allocation – 
Any relaxation or concession in eligibility or in selection criteria, 
if taken at any stage of examination by such candidate of SC, 
ST and OBC, they may not get any benefit to claim the vacancy 
of unreserved category, in particular, in the context of r.17(1), 
Exam Rule, 2013 seeking allocation of General Insider vacancy 
in home State cadre as it would be contrary to paragraph 9 of 
the Cadre Allocation Policy – The General category cut-off for 
the Preliminary Examination was fixed at 267 – Respondent No.1 
secured 247.18 marks – Had he been put against the general 
standard, his candidature would have been terminated at the 
first stage i.e., the Preliminary Examination – His candidature 
succeeded in the first stage of the examination because of the 
relaxed standards allowed in the Preliminary Examination for 
SC candidates i.e. 233 marks – After availing the benefit of this 
relaxation for admission to the Main Examination, Respondent 
No.1 cannot subsequently claim to have been selected on “General 
Standard” merely due to his performance in the subsequent 
stages surpassed the general standard – If a candidate who has 
resorted a relaxation at any stage of examination, would not fall 
within the purview of the proviso to r.14(ii), Exam Rules, 2013 and 
thus, for the purpose of the applicable Policy for cadre allocation, 
he would not fall within the list of candidates selected on ‘General 
Standard’ claiming General Insider vacancy of home state cadre as 
insider candidate – Respondent No. 1, having availed the benefit 
of “Relaxed Standard” in the Preliminary Examination, cannot be 
treated as a candidate selected on “General Standard” thus, he is 
not entitled to be allocated against the “General Insider” vacancy 
in the Karnataka Cadre in place of Respondent No.3 – High Court 
while affirming the judgment of the Tribunal glossed over r.1, intent 
of r.13 and intent of proviso to r.13 as well as the real meaning of 
r.14 and proviso thereto along with paragraph 9 of Cadre Allocation 
Policy – Impugned judgments of High Court set aside – Notification 
dtd.13.03.15 issued by the MoEFCC insofar allocating the Karnataka 
Cadre to Respondent No.3 and Tamil Nadu Cadre to Respondent 
No.1, upheld as correct. [Paras 28, 32, 36, 38-40]

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
143
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
The Rules for a competitive examination to be held by the 
Union Public Service Commission in 2013 – Proviso to r.14(ii) – 
‘Relaxed Standard’ – Consequence of availing:
Held: If a candidate has found place in the merit list without 
availing ‘Relaxed Standards’ i.e., without resorting to ‘any’ 
‘relaxations’ or ‘concessions’ in eligibility or selection criteria ‘at 
any stage of examination’, they shall not be adjusted against the 
vacancies reserved for SC, ST and OBC – In the above context, 
the word ‘any’ is relatable to relaxations or concessions either in 
‘eligibility’ or any ‘selection criteria’ – It further qualifies that such 
relaxation/concession can be availed at ‘any stage of examination’ 
having relevance to r.1 which indicates that all candidates would 
be required to qualify the Preliminary Examination in order to 
appear in the Main Examination – Therefore, the proviso throws 
light by focusing on the issue of relaxations and concessions 
in eligibility or selection criteria at any stage of examination. 
[Paras 21, 22]
The Rules for a competitive examination to be held by the 
Union Public Service Commission in 2013 – r.1, Proviso to 
r.14(ii) – Vacancies in the Indian Forest Service (IFS):
Held: r.1 stipulates that IFS examination involves two tiers – Without 
qualifying first tier i.e., Preliminary Examination, a candidate may 
not be in a position to participate in Main Examination (Written) – 
Therefore, even though the Preliminary Examination is merely 
a screening test and marks obtained may not be counted for 
determining final merit as per Clause 2 of s.I of Appendix-I, 
Exam Rules, 2013, nonetheless, it is an integral stage of the 
examination and relaxation availed by any candidate even at the 
stage of Preliminary Examination cannot escape the phraseology 
of proviso to r.14(ii) i.e., ‘relaxed standard’ granted at ‘any stage 
of examination’. [Para 29]
The Rules for a competitive examination to be held by the 
Union Public Service Commission in 2013 – r.1, Proviso to 
r.13, Proviso to r.14(ii) – Vacancies in the Indian Forest Service 
(IFS) – Mandate of r.1 ignored by High Court – Further, r.14(ii) 
deals with the situation for the candidates of SC, ST and 
OBC where discretion has been conferred upon UPSC to 
grant relaxed standards to the fittest of these candidates for 
selection to the service – While dealing with those relaxed 

144
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
standards, it has been made clear in proviso that the candidates 
of SC, ST and OBC recommended without resorting to ‘any’, 
‘relaxation’ or ‘concession’ in ‘eligibility’ or ‘selection criteria’ 
at ‘any stage of examination’ may be adjusted against the 
vacancies of unreserved category – Those reserved category 
candidates who have availed of any relaxation or concession 
at ‘any stage of the examination’ are not eligible to be adjusted 
against unreserved vacancies.[Paras 26, 27]
Case Law Cited
Deepa E.V. v. Union of India and Ors. [2017] 1 SCR 938 : (2017) 
12 SCC 680; Gaurav Pradhan v. State of Rajasthan (2018) 11 
SCC 352; Niravkumar Dilipbhai Makwana v. Gujarat Public Service 
Commission [2019] 9 SCR 47 : (2019) 7 SCC 383; Union of 
India v. Sajib Roy [2025] 9 SCR 542 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 
1943 – relied on.
Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of U.P. [2010] 1 SCR 325 : (2010) 3 
SCC 119; Ajithkumar P. v. Remin K. R. (2015) 16 SCC 778; Vikas 
Sankhala and Others v. Vikas Kumar Agarwal and Others [2016] 
7 SCR 639 : (2017) 1 SCC 350 – distinguished.
List of Acts
The Rules for a competitive examination to be held by the Union 
Public Service Commission in 2013.
List of Keywords
Indian Forest Service (IFS); Relaxation; Relaxation in qualifying 
marks at the preliminary stage; Relaxation or concession obtained 
in ‘eligibility’ or ‘selection criteria’; Effect in the matter of cadre 
allocation; Insider General’ candidate; Cadre allocation against 
unreserved vacancy; General Insider vacancy for State of Karnataka 
in the Indian Forest Service (IFS); Cadre Allocation Policy; Reserved 
category candidate availed relaxation while qualifying Preliminary 
Examination; Meritorious SC candidate; Allocation against General 
vacancy; Relaxation availed in the SC cut-off marks at the stage of 
Preliminary Examination; Relaxation at any stage of examination; 
Reserved category candidate secured more marks than cut-off 
of General Category candidate; Main Examination; Interview for 
personality test; Reserved category candidate; Unreserved category 
candidate; Vacancies in the Indian Forest Service (IFS)

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
145
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 51 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 06.08.2019 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in WP No. 54254 of 2016
With
Civil Appeal No. 52 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
K.M. Nataraj, A.S.G., Nikhil Goel, Devashish Bharukha, Sr. Advs., 
Amit Pai, Aditya Bhat, Ms. Pankhuri Bhardwaj, T. Dutta, Gurmeet 
Singh Makker, Ms. Satvika Thakur, Ishaan Sharma, Shailesh 
Madiyal, Rohan Gupta, Apoorv Kurup.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Jayanth Muth Raj, Nikhil Goel, Sr. Advs., Vinodh Kanna B, Abhilash 
M R, Ms. Thilagavathi P, M/s M R Law Associates, Vardhman 
Kaushik, Dhruv Joshi, Amit Pai, Aditya Bhat, Ms. Pankhuri Bhardwaj, 
T. Dutta.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.K. Maheshwari J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Assailing the final judgment and order dated 06.08.2019 passed 
in Writ Petition No. 18947 of 2016 (S-CAT) connected with Writ 
Petition No. 54254 of 2016 (S-CAT) by the High Court of Karnataka 
at Bengaluru (hereinafter referred to as ‘High Court’), the appellants 
have filed these appeals. For the sake of brevity, we will refer to 
the parties as per their status in Civil Appeal arising out of Special 
Leave Petition (C) No. 4743 of 2020.
3.	
The dispute in the present appeals is regarding the claim of a reserved 
category candidate i.e., Respondent No. 1, who availed relaxation 
in the Preliminary Examination but was placed higher in merit than 
the unreserved candidate i.e., Respondent No. 3 in the final merit 

146
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
list based on total marks awarded in Main Examination (Written) and 
Personality Test, to be treated as a General merit candidate for the 
purpose of cadre allocation against a General Insider vacancy for 
State of Karnataka in the Indian Forest Service (hereinafter referred 
to as ‘IFS’).
4.	
Being aggrieved by the notification dated 13.03.2015 issued by the 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (hereinafter 
referred to as ‘MoEFCC’), allocating Tamil Nadu Cadre to Respondent 
No. 1 instead of Karnataka, Respondent No. 1 preferred an 
Original Application No. 170/239 of 2015 (hereinafter referred to 
as ‘OA’) before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Bangalore 
Bench (hereinafter referred to as ‘Tribunal’) and vide order dated 
15.03.2016, the Tribunal allowed the Original Application holding 
that a meritorious Scheduled Caste (hereinafter referred to as ‘SC’) 
candidate cannot be denied allocation against a General vacancy 
solely on the ground of availing relaxation in the SC cut-off marks 
at the stage of Preliminary Examination. The Tribunal directed to 
allocate the General Insider vacancy in the State of Karnataka to 
Respondent No. 1. Being aggrieved by the said order, WP No. 18947 
of 2016 (S-CAT) was filed by Respondent No. 3 (who was allocated 
the General insider vacancy) and WP No. 54254 of 2016 (S-CAT) was 
filed by the Union of India (hereinafter referred to as ‘UOI’), which 
came to be dismissed by the common impugned order of the High 
Court, affirming the view of the Tribunal. Hence, the present appeals.
FACTUAL MATRIX
5.	
Prequel to the present litigation, the MoEFCC issued Notification 
No. 17011/01/2013-IFS-II dated 05.03.2013 publishing ‘The Rules 
for a competitive examination to be held by the Union Public Service 
Commission in 2013’ (hereinafter referred to as ‘Exam Rules, 2013’) 
for the purpose of filling vacancies in the Indian Forest Service.
6.	
Respondent No. 1, belongs to SC category and Respondent No. 
3 belongs to General category. Both appeared for the Preliminary 
Examination in the year 2013. As per Exam Rules, 2013, the selection 
process for IFS involved following two tiers – (i) the Civil Services 
(Preliminary) Examination for purpose of screening; and (ii) the 
Indian Forest Service (Main) Examination followed by an Interview 
for personality test. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
147
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
7.	
It is undisputed that in the Preliminary Examination, the cut-off to 
qualify by General Category candidates was 267 and the cut-off 
to qualify by SC category candidates was 233. Respondent No. 1 
secured 247.18 marks, which was below the cut-off to qualify as 
General category candidate, however, declared qualified for the Main 
Examination availing the relaxed cut-off applicable to SC candidates. 
Simultaneously, Respondent No. 3 secured 270.68 marks in the 
Preliminary Exam and qualified for the Main Examination (Written) 
as the said score was above the cut-off for General category. The 
details of the marks obtained has been tabulated for ready reference 
as under: –
Name of Candidate
Category
(as 
availed for 
purpose of 
Preliminary 
Exam)
Qualifying 
Marks 
(for 
purpose of 
Preliminary 
Exam)
Marks 
Obtained 
in the 
Preliminary 
Exam
G Kiran
[Respondent No. 1]
SC
233
247.18
Antony S Mariyappa
[Respondent No. 3]
General/
Unreserved
267
270.68
8.	
Both the candidates appeared in the Main Examination (Written) in 
October 2013 and qualified the same. They appeared in Interview 
for personality test in December 2013. After all the stages of exam 
and on the basis of marks secured by respective candidates in the 
Main Examination and Interview, on 29th January 2014, the Union 
Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as ‘UPSC’) 
recommended total 85 candidates for appointment as IFS. 
9.	
In the final merit list, Respondent No. 1 was placed at rank 19 
while Respondent No. 3 came to be placed at rank 37. Consequent 
thereto, controversy was set into motion during the allocation of 
cadres. For the 2013 examination, there were only two available 
vacancies in the State of Karnataka - one was of ‘General Insider’ 
and the other was of ‘OBC Outsider’. Applying the Cadre Allocation 
Policy issued on 10th April 2008 later amended on 21st April 2011 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Policy’), the UOI vide notification dated 
13.03.2015 (hereinafter referred to as ‘impugned notification’) 

148
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
allocated the ‘General Insider’ vacancy for State of Karnataka to 
Respondent No. 3 being General category candidate. On the other 
hand, Respondent No. 1, who was also having preference for State 
of Karnataka, allocated the Tamil Nadu cadre, since no SC Insider 
post was vacant in the State of Karnataka.
10.	 Challenging the impugned notification, Respondent No. 1 filed the OA 
before the Tribunal on 26.03.2015 asking to quash the notification 
in so far as it relates to him and Respondent No. 3 and also sought 
a consequent direction to UOI and UPSC to allot him the General 
Insider vacancy in the State of Karnataka with all consequential 
benefits. The Tribunal, by order dated 15.03.2016 allowed the OA, 
which was affirmed by the High Court vide impugned order dated 
06.08.2019. 
11.	 The High Court was of the view that since Respondent No. 1 had 
secured a higher rank in Main Examination (Written) compared to 
Respondent No. 3, and the Preliminary Examination was merely a 
screening test and marks obtained therein were not to be considered 
to draw the final merit, therefore, for cadre allocation, the former 
should be treated as General category candidate and would be entitled 
to get allocation of Karnataka cadre in General Insider vacancy. 
Assailing these findings, present appeals have been preferred by 
UOI and Respondent No. 3.
ARGUMENTS OF APPELLANT AND RESPONDENTS 
12.	 Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned Senior Counsel and Additional Solicitor 
General of India, with vehemence submitted that the allocation of 
cadre is governed by the Exam Rules, 2013 and the Policy. Rule 
14 of the Exam Rules, 2013 specifically bars the adjustment of 
reserved category candidates against unreserved vacancies if they 
have availed relaxation at any stage in eligibility or selection criteria. 
He put forth emphasis to phrase ‘any stage of the examination’ 
and argued that Respondent No. 1 could not secure marks above 
cut-off for General category in the Preliminary Examination. He 
had appeared in Main Examination after getting benefit of relaxed 
standard in SC category, therefore, having availed a relaxation in 
Preliminary Examination, Respondent No. 1 cannot be a candidate 
selected on “General Standards” required under Paragraph 9 of the 
Policy read with Rule 14 of the Exam Rules, 2013. To buttress such 
contentions, reliance has been placed on the judgments of this Court 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
149
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
in Deepa E.V. v. Union of India and Ors.1, Gaurav Pradhan v. State 
of Rajasthan2, Niravkumar Dilipbhai Makwana v. Gujarat Public 
Service Commission3, Union of India v. Sajib Roy4.
13.	 Learned Counsel Mr. Vardhman Kaushik, representing the UPSC 
has supported the submissions made by the Learned Additional 
Solicitor General of India. Similarly, Learned Senior Counsel, Mr. 
Nikhil Goel, appearing for the Respondent No. 3, and the Appellant 
in the connected appeal, has also supported the said contentions 
and urged that once the benefit of relaxation has been obtained 
by Respondent No. 1 in the Preliminary Examination, he cannot 
claim ‘General Insider’ vacancy at a later stage at the time of cadre 
allocation, therefore, the decisions of the Tribunal and High Court 
are liable to be set-aside.
14.	 Per contra, Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Jayanth Muth Raj appearing 
for Respondent No. 1 submits that the Preliminary Examination 
is merely a screening test to shortlist candidates for the Main 
Examination. Clause 2 of Section I of Appendix I to the Exam Rules, 
2013 clearly stipulates that the marks obtained in the Preliminary 
Examination by the candidates will not be counted for determining 
the final order of merit. As such the marks obtained by Respondent 
No. 1 in Preliminary Examination, taking benefit of relaxed standards 
applicable to SC Candidate cannot be used adversely for the purpose 
of cadre allocation to him. 
15.	 It is urged, once a candidate performs on merit, surpasses the 
‘General Standards’ and qualifies the Main Examination, securing a 
higher rank than Respondent No. 3 i.e. General category candidate in 
the final list, the grant of initial relaxation in Preliminary Examination 
fades into insignificance. It is said that denial of the General Insider 
vacancy to a more meritorious candidate on the pretext of relaxation 
availed in the Preliminary Examination which doesn’t even form the 
basis of final merit list, violates the principles of meritocracy and 
substantive equality as enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the 
Constitution of India.
1	
(2017) 12 SCC 680
2	
(2018) 11 SCC 352
3	
(2019) 7 SCC 383
4	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1943

150
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
16.	 Learned Senior Counsel placed reliance upon the reasoning of the 
High Court that the term ‘General Standards’ in Paragraph 9 of the 
Policy refers to the ‘General Qualifying Standard’ as contained in 
Rule 14(i) of Exam Rules, which Respondent No. 1 undisputedly 
met and surpassed. In support of these contentions, judgements of 
this court in Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of UP5, Ajithkumar P. 
v. Remin K. R.6 and Vikas Sankhala and Others v. Vikas Kumar 
Agarwal and Others7 has been relied upon and prayed for dismissal 
of these appeals. 
APPRECIATION OF ARGUMENTS
17.	 After having heard learned counsels and upon perusal of the material 
placed, in our view, the question that falls for our consideration is 
whether a reserved category candidate who availed relaxation while 
qualifying Preliminary Examination, though secured more marks than 
cut-off of the General Category candidate in the Main Examination 
and Interview for personality test and secured place in the final 
merit list, can be considered as ‘Insider General’ candidate for cadre 
allocation against an unreserved vacancy?
18.	 In order to adjudicate upon the issue, it is pertinent to refer to the 
relevant provisions of Rules, 1, 13, 14 and 17 of the Exam Rules, 
2013 which are reproduced as hereunder -
“Rule 1. Indian Forest Service Examination will be a two 
tier (sic) examination – a preliminary screening examination 
followed by a Main Examination and Interviesw. For 
screening suitable number of candidates for the 2nd stage 
of the Examination to be named as Indian Forest Service 
(Main) Examination, all candidates would be required to 
qualify Civil Services (Preliminary) Examination (hereinafter 
called the Preliminary Examination).
xxx
xxx
xxx
Rule 13. Candidates who obtain such minimum qualifying 
marks in the Preliminary Examination as may be fixed by 
5	
(2010) 3 SCC 119
6	
(2015) 16 SCC 778
7	
(2017) 1 SCC 350

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
151
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
the Commission at their discretion shall be admitted to the 
Indian Forest Service (Main) Examination (Written); and 
candidates who obtain such minimum qualifying marks 
in the Main Examination (Written) as may be fixed by the 
Commission at their discretion shall be summoned by 
them for an interview for a personality test;
The minimum qualifying marks as determined above, may 
be relaxable at the discretion of the Commission, in favour 
of Physically Handicapped candidates, in order to fill up 
the vacancies reserved for them, if any.
Provided that candidates belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes 
may be summoned for an interview for personality test 
by the commission by applying relaxed standards in the 
Preliminary Examination as well as Main Examination 
(Written) if the Commission is of the opinion that sufficient 
number of candidates from these communities are not likely 
to be summoned for interview for a personality test on the 
basis of the general standard in order to fill up vacancies 
reserved for them.
xxx
xxx
xxx
Rule 14. (i) After interview, the candidates will be arranged 
by the Commission in the order of merit as disclosed by 
aggregate marks finally awarded to each candidate in the 
Main Examination. Thereafter, the commission shall, for the 
purpose of recommending candidates against unreserved 
vacancies, fix a qualifying mark (hereinafter referred to as 
general qualifying standard) with reference to the number 
of unreserved vacancies to be filled up on the basis of 
the Main Examination.
(ii) The candidates belonging to any of the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes 
may to the extent of the number of vacancies reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other 
Backward Classes be recommended by the Commission 
by a relaxed standard, subject to the fitness of these 
candidates for selection to the Service.

152
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Provided that the candidates belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward 
Classes who have been recommended by the Commission 
without resorting to any relaxations/concessions in 
the eligibility or selection criteria, at any stage of the 
examination, shall not be adjusted against the vacancies 
reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes 
and Other Backward Classes. 
xxx
xxx
xxx
Rule 17. (i) A candidate who qualifies the Preliminary 
Examination shall be required to indicate the Detailed 
Application Form his/her choice in the order of preference 
from amongst the various State Cadres including his/her 
‘Home State’ in case he/she is appointed to the Indian 
Forest Service.
(ii) the cadre allotment to candidates appointed to Indian 
Forest Service will be governed by the policy of cadre 
allotment in force at the time of allotment of cadre. Due 
consideration will be given at the time of making allocation 
on the results of the examination to the preferences 
expressed by candidate for various cadres at the time of 
his/her application.”
19.	 After going through Rule 1, it is evident that IFS examination consists 
of two tiers - tier one is of Preliminary Examination and tier two 
consists of Main Examination (Written) and Interview. For screening 
suitable number of candidates for the 2nd stage i.e., Indian Forest 
Service (Main) Examination, all candidates are required to qualify 
the Preliminary Examination.
20.	 Perusal of Rule 13 makes it abundantly clear that after obtaining 
minimum qualifying marks in Preliminary Examination, the candidate, 
shall be entitled to appear in the Main Examination (Written). The 
candidate obtaining minimum qualifying marks in Main Examination 
may be summoned for Interview for personality test. The determination 
of the minimum qualifying marks to summon a candidate for an 
Interview for personality test shall be the discretion of the UPSC. 
The proviso confers discretion upon UPSC for applying the ‘Relaxed 
Standards’ to the candidates belonging to the SC, ST and OBC 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
153
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
either in Preliminary or Main Examination (Written) in case sufficient 
member of these communities are not likely to be summoned applying 
the ‘General Standard’ to fill up the vacancies reserved for these 
categories. 
21.	 As per Rule 14, the candidates who obtain qualifying marks in Main 
Examination (Written) and are summoned for Interview for personality 
test shall be arranged in the order of merit as disclosed by the UPSC 
on the basis of the aggregate of marks scored in Main Examination 
(Written). After preparation of merit list, the UPSC shall fix qualifying 
marks for applying ‘General Qualifying Standards’ for recommending 
the candidate commensurate to the available unreserved vacancies, 
to be filled up on the basis of the Main Examination. In this view, 
Rule 14(i) operates in two parts. First portion deals with preparation 
of merit list and latter portion deals with preparation of merit list of 
unreserved category applying the general qualifying standards. Rule 
14(ii) applies to the candidates belonging to the SC, ST and OBC to 
which the UPSC shall make recommendation on basis of ‘Relaxed 
Standard’ subject to the fitness of these candidates for selection to 
the service. The consequence of availing the ‘Relaxed Standard’ is 
stipulated in the proviso to Rule 14(ii), whereby it is clear that if a 
candidate has found place in the merit list without availing ‘Relaxed 
Standards’ i.e., without resorting to ‘any’ ‘relaxations’ or ‘concessions’ 
in eligibility or selection criteria ‘at any stage of examination’, they shall 
not be adjusted against the vacancies reserved for SC, ST and OBC. 
22.	 In the above context, the word ‘any’ is relatable to relaxations or 
concessions either in ‘eligibility’ or any ‘selection criteria’. It further 
qualifies that such relaxation/concession can be availed at ‘any stage 
of examination’ having relevance to Rule 1 which indicates that all 
candidates would be required to qualify the Preliminary Examination 
in order to appear in the Main Examination. Therefore, the proviso 
throw light by focusing on the issue of relaxations and concessions 
in eligibility or selection criteria at any stage of examination. At 
this stage, the point to ponder upon is if a candidate obtains such 
relaxation or concession in ‘eligibility’ or ‘selection criteria’ what would 
be its effect in the matter of cadre allocation, especially in the facts 
and circumstances of the case in hand.
23.	 As per Rule 17 of Exam Rules, 2013, indeed it is correct to say 
that only after qualifying the Preliminary Examination the candidate 

154
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
does have a choice to submit the preference for various state cadres 
including home state for appointment to the IFS. It is further true that 
the State Cadre allotment to the IFS will be governed by the policy 
in force at the time of allotment of cadre. In the said context the 
policy dated 10th April 2008 amended on 21st April 2011 governing 
the cadre allocation of the relevant time assumes significance. Para 
9 of the Policy is relevant, therefore, reproduced as thus: -
“9. Notwithstanding what has been said above a reserved 
category candidate selected on general standards shall 
be eligible for allocation against the available un-reserved 
vacancy as per his merit and preference. But if he cannot 
be allocated against such vacancy, for he is lower in rank 
compared with other general category candidates, he shall 
be considered for allocation as per his merit and preference 
against the available vacancy of his category.”
24.	 Upon conjoint reading of the Rules quoted above in juxtaposition to 
Clause 9 of the Policy, it is clear that a reserved category candidate 
selected applying ‘General Standard’ has eligibility for allocation on 
unreserved vacancy as per his merit and preference if he is not 
lower in rank from other General category candidates, otherwise he 
shall be considered for allocation as per his merit and preference 
against the available vacancy of his category. In the said context, 
it is clear that for allocation of unreserved vacancy to a candidate 
of reserved category, the selection must be on ‘General Standard’ 
without availing any ‘Relaxed Standard’ in either eligibility or selection 
criteria. In case any ‘Relaxed Standard’ has been availed by him, his 
allocation of cadre would be as per his merit and preference against 
vacancy of his category. 
25.	 After analyzing the Exam Rules, 2013 and the Policy, we find 
ourselves at variance with the findings recorded in the Impugned 
Order. While dismissing the Writ Petition and affirming the order of the 
Tribunal, the thrust of reasoning of the High Court was that ‘General 
Standards’ as used in Paragraph 9 of Policy can only mean to be 
‘General Qualifying Standard’ as appearing in Rule 14(i) of Exam 
Rules, 2013 i.e. qualifying marks fixed by UPSC with reference to 
number of unreserved vacancies to be filled up on the basis of the 
Main Examination. In other words, the High Court effectively read 
Paragraph 9 of the Policy to mean that if a reserved category candidate 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
155
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
selected acquiring the position in the merit of unreserved category list 
obtaining ‘qualifying marks fixed by UPSC with reference to number 
of unreserved vacancies on the basis of the Main Examination’ shall 
be eligible for allocation against available unreserved vacancies. It 
was also observed that the purpose behind providing relaxation in 
the nature of age, number of attempts, payment of fees and such 
other eligibility criteria in favour of candidates belonging to reserved 
category is to ensure a level playing field and that real merit is tested 
in the Main Examination (Written) where the mettle of the candidates 
is put to test. Hence, if the candidates belonging to the reserved 
category score better than a general merit candidate in the tier two 
examination, such candidate cannot be denied cadre allocation in 
open category insider cadre vacancy. 
26.	 We are unable to subscribe to and confirm the view taken by the 
High Court. In our view, the High Court lost sight of the mandate 
of Rule 1 which clearly prescribes that IFS Examination consists of 
two tiers - first tier is Preliminary Examination followed by tier two 
involving Main Exam (Written) and Interview. Only those candidates 
who are found suitable in the first tier may avail entry for the tier two. 
All the candidates are required to qualify Preliminary Examination for 
participation in further selection process by way of Main Examination 
(Written) and Interview. Rule 13 and its proviso contemplate that 
only those candidates who obtain minimum qualifying marks as 
prescribed on discretion by UPSC in the Preliminary Examination 
shall be admitted to the Main Examination (Written) and all those 
candidates who obtain minimum qualifying marks as prescribed 
by UPSC in the Main Examination (Written) shall be called upon 
for an Interview for a personality test. The proviso to the said rule 
provides for applying relaxed standards in Preliminary as well as the 
Main Examination (Written) to SC, ST and OBC candidates for the 
purpose of summoning them for interview if such candidate does not 
come within the general standards in order to fill up the vacancies 
of reserved category and to facilitate due representation.
27.	 Further, Rule 14(i) deals with preparation of merit list after a 
written and interview for personality test. Thereafter, it deals with 
recommending the candidates against unreserved vacancies applying 
general standards with reference to number of unreserved vacancies. 
Rule 14(ii) deals with the situation for the candidates of SC, ST and 
OBC where discretion has been conferred upon UPSC to grant 

156
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
relaxed standards to the fittest of these candidates for selection 
to the service. While dealing with those relaxed standards, it has 
been made clear in proviso that the candidates of SC, ST and OBC 
recommended without resorting to ‘any’, ‘relaxation’ or ‘concession’ 
in ‘eligibility’ or ‘selection criteria’ at ‘any stage of examination’ may 
be adjusted against the vacancies of unreserved category. The 
natural corollary to the above makes it clear those reserved category 
candidates who have availed of any relaxation or concession at ‘any 
stage of the examination’ are not eligible to be adjusted against 
unreserved vacancies.
28.	 On appreciation of the rules referred above, it is clear that any 
relaxation or concession in eligibility or in selection criteria, if taken 
at any stage of examination by such candidate of SC, ST and OBC, 
they may not get any benefit to claim the vacancy of unreserved 
category, in particular, in the context of Rule 17(1) of the Exam Rule, 
2013 seeking allocation of General Insider vacancy in home State 
cadre as it would be contrary to paragraph 9 of the Policy. 
29.	 It is relevant to emphasis that Rule 1 clearly stipulates that IFS 
examination involves two tiers. Without qualifying first tier i.e., 
Preliminary Examination, a candidate may not be in a position to 
participate in Main Examination (Written). Therefore, even though 
the Preliminary Examination is merely a screening test and marks 
obtained may not be counted for determining final merit as per Clause 
2 of Section I of Appendix-I of Exam Rules, 2013, nonetheless, it 
is an integral stage of the examination and relaxation availed by 
any candidate even at the stage of Preliminary Examination cannot 
escape the phraseology of proviso to Rule 14(ii) i.e., ‘relaxed standard’ 
granted at ‘any stage of examination’.
30.	 At this juncture, we can profitably refer to the judgment of this Court 
in Deepa E.V. (Supra). In the said case, the appellant, who was an 
OBC category candidate, sought appointment on general unreserved 
vacancy on the ground that the marks obtained by her was over and 
above the minimum cut-off marks prescribed for general category 
candidates. While considering a similar provisions as per O.M. of 
Department of Personnel and Training dated 01.07.1998, it was held 
that when a candidate avails age relaxation, he is not entitled to be 
adjusted against the unreserved category. The relevant paragraph 
is reproduced as thus – 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
157
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
“7. On a combined reading of Rule 9 of the Export 
Inspection Agency (Recruitment) Rules, 1980 and also 
the proceedings dated 1-7-1998, we find that there is 
an express bar for the candidates belonging to SC/ST/
OBC who have availed relaxation for being considered 
for general category candidates.”
The logic applied in above case applies with equal force to relaxation 
in qualifying marks at the preliminary stage as it has happened in 
the present appeals.
31.	 We also find merit in the reliance placed by the Appellant on the 
decision in Gaurav Pradhan (Supra). In that case, the post in 
question was of Police Constables and Sub-Inspectors of Police 
and the recruitment process was of the year 2010. Vide an earlier 
circular dated 24.06.2008, it was provided that the members of SC/ST/
OBC can compete against non-reserved vacancies and be counted 
against them, in case they have not taken any concession (like that 
of age, etc.) available to them other than that relating to payment 
of examination fees in case of direct recruitment. Thereafter, vide 
a circular dated 11.05.2011, without superseding earlier circular of 
2008, it was provided that if a candidate belonging to BC/SBC/SC/
ST, irrespective of whether they have availed of or not any of the 
special concession which are available to them, secures more marks 
than the marks obtained by last unreserved category candidate 
who is selected, such a candidate belonging to aforementioned 
categories shall be counted against unreserved category vacancies 
and not reserved vacancies. On filing writ petitions before High 
Court by various general category candidates, the learned Single 
Judge dismissed the same which came to be confirmed with certain 
modifications by the Division Bench. While allowing the appeals, this 
Court observed thus: 
“33. In a recent judgment, this Court has occasion to 
consider the judgment of this Court in Jitendra Kumar Singh 
case [Jitendra Kumar Singh v. State of U.P., (2010) 3 SCC 
119 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 772] . The learned counsel for 
the appellants has placed much reliance on the judgment 
of this Court dated 6-4-2017 in Deepa E.V. v. Union of India 
[Deepa E.V. v. Union of India, (2017) 12 SCC 680 : (2018) 
1 SCC (L&S) 100] . It is necessary to notice the facts of the 

158
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
case and the issues decided by this Court in Deepa E.V. 
[Deepa E.V. v. Union of India, (2017) 12 SCC 680 : (2018) 
1 SCC (L&S) 100] The appellant before this Court was an 
OBC category candidate who claimed that she should be 
treated as general category candidate. The appellant had 
availed the age relaxation as OBC category candidate. A 
writ petition was filed by the appellant claiming that she 
should be treated as candidate in general category. The 
learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition by the 
judgment dated 16-1-2015 [Deepa E.V. v. Union of India, 
2015 SCC OnLine Ker 2470] which judgment was affirmed 
[Deepa E.V. v. Union of India, 2015 SCC OnLine Ker 21264] 
by the Division Bench in the writ appeal. In para 2 of the 
judgment, facts were noted to the following effect: (Deepa 
E.V. case [Deepa E.V. v. Union of India, (2017) 12 SCC 
680 : (2018) 1 SCC (L&S) 100] , SCC p. 681)
“2. The appellant applied for the post of Laboratory 
Assistant Grade II in Export Inspection Council of 
India functioning under the Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Government of India. The appellant belongs 
to Dheevara community which is one of the “Other 
Backward Class”. Since the appellant was aged 26 
years, she got age relaxation, as was granted to 
OBC category candidates. The appellant was one 
of the eleven candidates from OBC who were called 
for interview. The appellant secured 82 marks (in 
the list of candidates from OBC category). One Ms 
Serena Joseph (OBC), who secured 93 marks was 
selected and appointed.”
xxx
xxx
xxx
37. The judgment of this Court in Deepa E.V. [Deepa E.V. v. 
Union of India, (2017) 12 SCC 680 : (2018) 1 SCC (L&S) 
100] fully supports the case of the appellants. In Deepa 
E.V. case [Deepa E.V. v. Union of India, (2017) 12 SCC 
680 : (2018) 1 SCC (L&S) 100] also the Circular of the 
Central Government dated 1-7-1998/2-7-1997 provided the 
relevant provision which is to the following effect: (SCC 
pp. 682-83, para 6)

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
159
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
“6. … ‘… In other words, when a relaxed standard 
is applied in selecting SC/ST/OBC candidates, for 
example in the age-limit, experience, qualification, 
permitted number of chances in written examination, 
extended zone of consideration larger than what is 
provided for general category candidates, etc., the 
SC/ST/OBC candidates are to be counted against 
reserved vacancies. Such candidates would be 
deemed as unavailable for consideration against 
unreserved vacancies.’ ”
(emphasis in original)
xxx
xxx
xxx
46. The Division Bench [Rajesh Singh v. State of Rajasthan, 
2014 SCC OnLine Raj 6470 : (2014) 2 RLW 1585] as well 
as the learned counsel appearing for the State of Rajasthan 
has relied on the Circular dated 11-5-2011. The Division 
Bench has observed that the Circular dated 11-5-2011 did 
not change the rules of game. The following observation 
has been made with regard to the Circular dated 11-5-2011: 
(Rajesh Singh case [Rajesh Singh v. State of Rajasthan, 
2014 SCC OnLine Raj 6470 : (2014) 2 RLW 1585] , SCC 
OnLine Raj para 57)
“57. In the instant case, the State Government in 
supersession of its earlier policy decision regarding 
treatment to be given to the candidates belonging 
to reserved category who are selected against 
unreserved category vacancies, issued directives 
for guidance to the appointing authorities vide the 
Circular dated 11-5-2011 that neither changed the 
eligibility criteria seeking employment nor manner 
and method of selection of suitable candidates and 
in our considered view, the Circular dated 11-5-2011 
did not change rules of the game after the game is 
played or process of selection is initiated as observed 
by the learned Single Judge [Madan Lal v. State of 
Rajasthan, 2012 SCC OnLine Raj 1182] , [Manish 
Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 2013 SCC OnLine 

160
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Raj 4100] but such policy decisions are always 
within realm of judicial review and this is what the 
Court considered and examined policy decision of 
the Government impugned.”
xxx
xxx
xxx
49. In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the 
considered opinion that the candidates belonging to 
SC/ST/BC, who had taken relaxation of age, were not 
entitled to be migrated to the unreserved vacancies; the 
State of Rajasthan has migrated such candidates who 
have taken concession of age against the unreserved 
vacancies which resulted displacement of a large number 
of candidates who were entitled to be selected against the 
unreserved category vacancies. The candidates belonging 
to unreserved category who could not be appointed due 
to migration of candidates belonging to SC/ST/BC were 
clearly entitled for appointment which was denied to them 
on the basis of the above illegal interpretation put by the 
State. We, however, also take notice of the fact that the 
reserved category candidates who had taken benefit of age 
relaxation and were migrated on the unreserved category 
candidates, are working for more than last five years. The 
reserved category candidates who were appointed on 
migration against unreserved vacancies are not at fault 
in any manner. Hence, we are of the opinion that SC/ST/
BC candidates who have been so migrated in reserved 
vacancies and appointed, should not be displaced and 
allowed to continue in respective posts. On the other hand, 
the unreserved candidates who could not be appointed 
due to the above illegal migration are also entitled for 
appointment as per their merit. The equities have to be 
adjusted by this Court.” 
(emphasis supplied)
In the said case, this Court while affirming the view taken in Deepa 
E.V. (Supra), held that reserved category candidates who had availed 
corresponding relaxations, could not be considered on general/
unreserved vacancies. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
161
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
32.	 Similarly, this court in Niravkumar Dilipbhai (Supra) while considering 
an identical factual situation involving a circular barring consideration 
of reserved category candidates on unreserved posts observed as 
under – 
“22. Article 16(4) of the Constitution is an enabling provision 
empowering the State to make any provision or reservation 
of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of 
citizens which in the opinion of the State is not adequately 
represented in the service under the State. It is purely a 
matter of discretion of the State Government to formulate a 
policy for concession, exemption, preference or relaxation 
either conditionally or unconditionally in favour of the 
backward classes of citizens. The reservation being the 
enabling provision, the manner and the extent to which 
reservation is provided has to be spelled out from the 
orders issued by the Government from time to time.
xxx
xxx
xxx
23. In the instant case, the State Government has framed 
policy for the grant of reservation in favour of SC/ST and 
OBC by the Circulars dated 21-1-2000 and 23-7-2004. 
The State Government has clarified that when a relaxed 
standard is applied in selecting a candidate for SC/ST, 
SEBC category in the age-limit, experience, qualification, 
permitting number of chances in the written examination, 
etc., then candidate of such category selected in the said 
manner, shall have to be considered only against his/her 
reserved post. Such a candidate would be deemed as 
unavailable for consideration against unreserved post.
xxx
xxx
xxx
34. There is also no merit in the submission of the learned 
counsel for the appellant that relaxation in age at the initial 
qualifying stage would not fall foul of the Circulars dated 
29-1-2000 and 23-7-2004. The distinction sought to be 
drawn between the preliminary and final examination is 
totally misconceived. It is evident from the advertisement 
that a person who avails of an age relaxation at the initial 
stage will necessarily avail of the same relaxation even at 

162
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the final stage. We are of the view that the age relaxation 
granted to the candidates belonging to SC/ST and SEBC 
category in the instant case is an incident of reservation 
under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India.”
(emphasis supplied)
The Court affirming the proposition of law stated that once relaxation 
has been taken by a reserved category candidate, they cannot be 
considered for unreserved vacancies. Inescapably, the aforesaid 
judgement also strengthens the view taken by us hereinabove 
interpreting the rules that if a reserved category candidate takes 
benefit of relaxation though at initial stage, it will effectively amount 
to taking relaxation even at the final stage of the selection process 
because without giving relaxation to him, he was not in a position 
to participate in the Main examination and to set forth his claim of 
cadre allocation. 
33.	 Very recently in Sajib Roy (Supra), this court had the occasion to 
deal with a similar factual matrix as observed hereunder–
“32. On an analysis of the aforecited cases, we summarise 
as follows: Whether a reserved candidate who has availed 
relaxation in fees/upper age limit to participate in open 
competition with general candidates may be recruited 
against unreserved seats would depend on the facts of 
each case. That is to say, in the event there is no embargo 
in the recruitment rules/employment notification, such 
reserved candidates who have scored higher than the last 
selected unreserved candidate shall be entitled to migrate 
and be recruited against unreserved seats. However, if an 
embargo is imposed under relevant recruitment rules, such 
reserved candidates shall not be permitted to migrate to 
general category seats. 
xxx
xxx
xxx
33. Accordingly, we hold as the respondents-writ petitioners 
had availed concession of age for participating in the 
recruitment process, in the teeth of office memorandum 
dated 01.07.1998, the High Court was wrong in applying 
the ratio in Jitendra Kumar (supra) and permitting them to 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
163
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
be considered for appointment in the unreserved category. 
Consequently, we set aside the common impugned 
judgment and order dated 12.10.2018 and order dated 
26.02.2019 and allow the appeals. Pending application(s) 
if any, stand disposed of.”
34.	 At this stage, pertinently the judgements relied upon by the learned 
senior counsel for Respondent No. 1 in their support are necessarily 
required to be appreciated. In Jitendra Kumar Singh (Supra), this court 
while considering whether an OBC candidate who applied exercising 
his option as a reserved category candidate, would be eligible to be 
considered against an unreserved vacancy, if he secures more marks 
than the last candidate in general category. Nonetheless, in the said 
case, this court was considering the issue in reference to instructions 
issued by the State of Uttar Pradesh dated 25.03.1994 which specifically 
provided for migration of reserved category candidates to unreserved 
vacancies despite they having availed any facility or relaxation (like 
relaxation in age limit) available to reserved category. Therefore, it is 
distinguishable on facts of the present appeals. 
35.	 In Ajithkumar P. (Supra), this Court was considering a factual 
situation wherein the reserved category candidate had availed 
relaxation in the preliminary examination, however, found that the 
said Preliminary Examination was not having any statutory basis. 
Therefore, this judgement is also distinguishable on facts and will not 
come to rescue to the case of Respondent No. 1. As far as Vikas 
Sankhala (Supra) is concerned, it involved recruitment to the post 
of teachers whereby relaxation in minimum pass marks in Teachers 
Eligibility Test to reserved category candidates was granted by state 
government in following manner –
a.	
10% to persons belonging to SC/ST/OBC/SBC/General-
Women
b.	
15% to all women of SC/ST/OBC/SBC and widowed /
divorced women
c.	
20% to persons covered under PwD 
Various candidates belonging to general category candidates came 
before this Court in Appeal on the ground that minimum qualifying 
marks with respect to TET was 60% and any relaxation thereto 
meant availing relaxation pursuant to reservation and thus, migration 

164
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of such candidates who took benefit of above indicated relaxations 
to the unreserved/general vacancies was impermissible. The said 
appeals were allowed with following observations – 
“80. Having regard to the respective submissions noted 
above, first aspect that needs consideration is as to whether 
relaxation in TET pass marks would amount to concession 
in the recruitment process. The High Court has held to 
be so on the premise that Para 9(a) dealing with such 
relaxation in TET marks forms part of the document which 
relates to the recruitment procedure. It is difficult to accept 
this rationale or analogy. Passing of TET examination is 
a condition of eligibility for appointment as a teacher. It is 
a necessary qualification without which a candidate is not 
eligible to be considered for appointment. This was clearly 
mentioned in the Guidelines/Notification dated 11-2-2011. 
These Guidelines pertain to conducting of TET; basic 
features whereof have already been pointed out above. 
Even Para 9 which provides for concessions that can be 
given to certain reserved categories deals with “qualifying 
marks” that is to be obtained in TET examination. Thus, 
a person who passes TET examination becomes eligible 
to participate in the selection process as and when such 
selection process for filling up of the posts of primary 
teachers is to be undertaken by the State. On the other 
hand, when it comes to recruitment of teachers, the method 
for appointment of teachers is altogether different. Here, 
merit list of successful candidates is to be prepared on the 
basis of marks obtained under different heads. One of the 
heads is “marks in TET”. So far as this head is concerned, 
20% of the marks obtained in TET are to be assigned to each 
candidate. Therefore, those reserved category candidates 
who secured lesser marks in TET would naturally get less 
marks under this head. We would like to demonstrate it 
with an example: Suppose a reserved category candidate 
obtains 53 marks in TET, he is treated as having qualified 
TET. However, when he is considered for selection to the 
post of primary teacher, in respect of allocation of marks 
he will get 20% marks for TET. As against him, a general 
candidate who secures 70 marks in TET shall be awarded 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
165
Union of India v. G. Kiran & Ors.
14 marks in recruitment process. Thus, on the basis of 
TET marks reserved category candidate has not got any 
advantage while considering his candidature for the post. 
On the contrary, “level-playing field” is maintained whereby 
a person securing higher marks in TET, whether belonging 
to general category or reserved category, is allocated 
higher marks in respect of 20% of TET marks. Thus, in 
recruitment process no weightage or concession is given 
and allocation of 20% of TET marks is applied across the 
board. Therefore, the High Court is not correct in observing 
that concession was given in the recruitment process on 
the basis of relaxation in TET.” 
(emphasis supplied)
Therefore, it is clear that the relaxations in TET marks were not 
considered to be a concession. For this reason, the said judgement 
is also distinguishable. 
36.	 In the facts of the present case, the General category cut-off for 
the Preliminary Examination was fixed at 267. Respondent No. 1 
secured 247.18 marks. Had the Respondent No. 1 been put against 
the general standard, his candidature would have been terminated 
at the first stage i.e., the Preliminary Examination. His candidature 
succeeded in the first stage of the examination because of the relaxed 
standards allowed in the Preliminary Examination for SC candidates 
i.e. 233 marks. After availing the benefit of this relaxation for admission 
to the Main Examination, Respondent No. 1 cannot subsequently 
claim to have been selected on “General Standard” merely due to his 
performance in the subsequent stages surpassed the general standard. 
Therefore, if a candidate who has resorted a relaxation at any stage 
of examination, would not fall within the purview of the proviso to Rule 
14(ii) of the Exam Rules, 2013 and in that situation, for the purpose 
of the applicable Policy for cadre allocation, he would not fall within 
the list of candidates selected on ‘General Standard’ claiming General 
Insider vacancy of home state cadre as insider candidate..
37.	 In light of the above exposition of law, we are of the opinion that in 
the present fact situation, the ‘General Insider’ vacancy in Karnataka 
was rightfully allocated to Respondent No. 3, who qualified the 
Preliminary Examination, Main Examination, and Interview on general 
standard. It is needless to say, Respondent No. 1, having qualified 

166
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the Preliminary Examination availing ‘relaxed standard’, becoming 
eligible for the Main Examination must be considered against the 
reserved vacancies only and cannot be considered on general/
unreserved vacancies for the purpose of cadre allocation.
38.	 In our view, the High Court while affirming the judgment of the Tribunal 
has glossed over Rule 1, intent of Rule 13 and intent of proviso to 
Rule 13 as well as the real meaning of Rule 14 and proviso thereto 
along with paragraph 9 of Policy. Therefore, the judgments of the 
Tribunal and the High Court deserve to be set aside.
CONCLUSION
39.	 In view of the foregoing, we hold that the Tribunal and the High 
Court were not correct in interpreting the relevant provisions of 
Exam Rules, 2013 and Paragraph 9 of the Policy and committed 
mistake in granting the relief to Respondent No. 1. We hold that 
Respondent No. 1, having availed the benefit of “Relaxed Standard” 
in the Preliminary Examination, cannot be treated as a candidate 
selected on “General Standard”. Consequently, he is not entitled to 
be allocated against the “General Insider” vacancy in the Karnataka 
Cadre in place of Respondent No.3. 
40.	 Accordingly, the appeals are allowed. The impugned final judgment 
and order dated 06.08.2019 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at 
Bengaluru in Writ Petition No. 54254 of 2016 (S-CAT) connected with 
Writ Petition No. 18947 of 2016 (S-CAT), affirming the order of the 
Central Administrative Tribunal, Bangalore Bench dated 15.03.2016 in 
O.A. No. 170/00239/2015, are hereby set aside. The notification dated 
13.03.2015 issued by the MoEFCC insofar allocating the Karnataka 
Cadre to Respondent No. 3 and Tamil Nadu Cadre to Respondent 
No. 1 is upheld as correct in eyes of law and without any alteration.
41.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. There shall 
be no order as to costs.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
