[2026] 3 S.C.R. 576 : 2026 INSC 249
Subramani
v.
State of Karnataka
(Criminal Appeal No. 2432 of 2010)
17 March 2026
[Pankaj Mithal* and S.V.N Bhatti, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the appellant is guilty of the offences u/ss.302 and 498A of 
IPC and whether the sentence (two years of simple imprisonment 
along with fine of Rs.2,000/- and in default in payment of the same, 
with a further three months of  simple imprisonment u/s.498A IPC 
and sentence of life imprisonment u/s.302 IPC) awarded to him 
is justified.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.302 and 498A – Allegation against 
appellant that he poured kerosene on his wife, lit a candle 
and threw it upon her – Victim died due to severe burn 
injuries – FIR registered u/ss.302 and 498A – The Trial Court 
acquitted appellant on the ground that the bathroom where 
the incident took place was very small where two persons 
could not have been accommodated – Trial Court also held 
that dying declaration of the victim was unreliable as deceased 
had received more than 80 to 90 percent burn injuries and 
as such she may not be in a mental state to depose or state 
anything – However, the High Court convicted the appellant – 
Correctness:
Held: It has come on record through evidence that the appellant 
used to beat and treat the deceased with cruelty – There were 
regular demands for money by him – PW-3, eldest daughter of 
appellant, an eye-witness, had clearly deposed that on the fateful 
night after a quarrel, appellant went out and brought kerosene, 
poured it on her mother and set her on fire – PW-4-Doctor, 
categorically stated that the death occurred due to septicaemia 
as a result of burn injuries sustained by victim – Another witness, 
* Author

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
577
Subramani v. State of Karnataka
PW-10-Doctor, recorded in his statement that victim informed 
him about the incident and a noting to that effect was also made 
in case sheet – PW-11, another doctor witness, stated that in 
the morning of 21.07.2000, the patient was conscious and in a 
position to give the statement, he gave permission to the police 
to record her statement – The dying declaration of the deceased 
was recorded by the Head Constable as PW-15 – Considering 
the circumstances and the evidence of PW-3, PW4, PW-10 and 
PW-11, there is no reason to disbelieve the dying declaration – This 
apart, the police had recovered a matchbox, a kerosene tin and 
burnt cloth pieces from the site of the incident immediately – In 
view of the above clinching pieces of evidence, there is hardly any 
scope for the acquittal of the appellant – The Trial Court was not 
justified in acquitting the appellant – The opinion of the High Court 
is perfectly justified. [Paras 9, 10, 12-14, 18, 20-24]
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Murder; Cruelty; Demand of money; Dying declaration; Burn 
injuries; Pieces of evidence; Motive to kill; Medical opinion; credible 
evidence.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2432 of 2010
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.09.2010 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in CRLA No. 1104 of 2004
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Shekhar G Devasa, Sr. Adv., Manish Tiwari, Mrs. Thashmitha 
Muthanna, Rakesh Kini, Shashi Bhushan Nagar, M/s. Devasa 
& Co.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Sanchit Garga, Kunal Rana, Shashwat Jaiswal, Ms. Aarohi Garg.

578
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
The appellant - Subramani and the deceased Chennamma were 
husband and wife. They were married for seventeen years before 
the date of the incident. They had two daughters and two sons. The 
eldest daughter was aged about sixteen years at the relevant time. 
They had lived a happy married life for about three years. Thereafter, 
their relations became strained, and it is alleged that the appellant 
started ill-treating the deceased and kept on raising demands for 
money, which the father of the deceased fulfilled most of the time. 
The appellant had even started treating her with cruelty. 
2.	
On the night of 20.07.2000, the appellant and the deceased as usual 
again picked up a quarrel. The appellant, in anger, went out and 
fetched some kerosene. The kerosene was poured on the deceased 
in a bathroom, the appellant lit a candle and threw it upon her, 
causing serious burn injuries. The appellant, after burning her, left the 
house. On the alarm raised by the deceased, the neighbours came 
and tried to save her. They doused the fire by pouring water. The 
deceased was taken to the Victoria Hospital by the neighbours and 
the mother of the appellant. She was admitted at around midnight 
and died after three days on 24.07.2000 in the hospital due to severe 
burn injuries received by her. 
3.	
An FIR No. 194 of 2000 under Section 302 and Section 498A of the 
Indian Penal Code1 was lodged by the father of the deceased on 
24.07.2000 after she had died. The police inspector Shiva Murthy, 
upon investigation submitted a chargesheet against the appellant for 
committing offences punishable under Section 498A and 302 IPC.
4.	
The appellant was put to trial. The Trial Court acquitted him primarily 
on the ground that the bathroom where the incident took place was 
very small where two persons could not have been accommodated. 
The testimonies of the family witnesses were inconsistent and 
unreliable. The medical evidence suggested that deceased had 
1	
For short, ‘IPC’

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
579
Subramani v. State of Karnataka
received more than 80 to 90 percent burn injuries and as such she 
may not be in a mental state to depose or state anything either to 
the doctor or the police. The dying declaration, if any, was therefore 
unreliable.
5.	
On an appeal by the State to the High Court, the Division Bench 
reversed the judgment and order of the Trial Court. The acquittal was 
set aside, and the appellant was convicted under both the above 
provisions. He was sentenced to two years of simple imprisonment 
along with fine of Rs.2,000/- and in default in payment of the same, 
with a further three months of simple imprisonment under Section 
498A. He was also convicted under Section 302 IPC for killing the 
deceased and was sentenced to life imprisonment and a fine of 
Rs.10,000/-, and in default, to undergo a further one month of simple 
imprisonment.
6.	
Aggrieved by the aforesaid conviction and sentence, the appellant 
preferred a Criminal Appeal under Section 379 of Cr.P.C which 
was admitted on 13.12.2010 after the delay in filing the same was 
condoned. Thus, the appeal is before us for consideration as to 
whether the appellant is guilty of the offences under Section 302 and 
498A of IPC and whether the sentence awarded to him is justified. 
7.	
We have heard Shri Shekhar G. Devasa, learned senior counsel 
for the appellant-Subramani and Shri Sanchit Garga, Advocate on 
record for the respondent-State of Karnataka. 
8.	
Learned senior counsel for the appellant argued that the High Court 
was not justified in interfering with the order of acquittal passed by the 
Trial Court, more particularly when the acquittal had been recorded on 
cogent and valid reasons after considering every piece of the evidence 
on record. It was submitted that apart from the inconsistencies in 
the statements of the material witnesses, particularly PW-7 and PW-
16, who categorically stated that the deceased was unconscious 
and not in a position to speak, there was no credible evidence to 
prove that the appellant had committed the offence as alleged. It 
was also submitted that the prosecution failed to prove any motive 
for homicidal death. It was inherently improbable that the offence 
could have been committed inside the small bathroom, and that no 
independent neighbour was examined to prove the commission of 
the offence. The alleged dying declaration was unreliable, as it was 

580
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
unsupported by any medical certificate and stood contradicted by 
hospital documents, which record a history of self-inflicted burns. 
Furthermore, the deceased had admittedly received more than 80 
to 90 percent burn injuries and was under heavy sedation. She was 
not in a position to make any statement. Therefore, the conviction 
based upon the alleged dying declaration of the deceased was 
wholly illegal. 
9.	
There is no dispute as to the fact that the parties were married 17 
years prior to the date of the incident and that there used to be frequent 
quarrels between them with regard to money. It has also come on 
record through evidence that the appellant used to beat and treat 
the deceased with cruelty. There were regular demands for money 
by him. The aforesaid facts and the evidence clearly establish that 
the appellant was not a satisfied man who suffered from frustration 
and as such had a motive to kill the deceased. 
10.	 The testimony of PW-3, Niresha, the eldest daughter of the appellant 
and the deceased who was aged about 16 year is very crucial and 
material. She had clearly deposed that on the fateful night, she, her 
mother, sister and brothers were in their house. Her father came and 
questioned the mother that when he had sent her to her paternal home 
to get money, why she had sent her father to counsel and advise 
him. Thus, they picked up a quarrel and her father threatened her 
mother to wait and see what he was going to do. He went out and 
brought kerosene, poured it on her mother and set her on fire. This 
was done at around 11:00 p.m. in the night and thereafter, he ran 
away from the house. On the screams of her mother, the neighbours 
came and extinguished the fire. Her grandmother and one another 
person took her mother to the hospital in the burnt state. Her mother 
remained in the hospital for three days, undergoing treatment, and 
thereafter, she died. 
11.	 The aforesaid witness PW-3 is an eyewitness. She has narrated 
the incident as was seen by her. There is no inconsistency in her 
statement and there is no reason to disbelieve her. There is no material 
on record to show as to why she would falsely depose against her 
father. Her evidence clinchingly proves that the appellant brought 
kerosene, poured it on her mother and lit the fire. 
12.	 The other crucial witness in the case is PW-4, Dr. S. Rudramurthy who 
had conducted the post-mortem upon the deceased. He categorically 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
581
Subramani v. State of Karnataka
stated that the death occurred due to septicaemia as a result of 
burn injuries sustained by her. He proved the postmortem report 
‘Exhibit P-2’ and his signatures on it. He further stated that the burn 
injuries were antemortem and were to the extent of 85 to 90 percent. 
He reported that septicaemia naturally occurs with such high burn 
injuries. He opined that the burn injuries received by the deceased 
were superficial in nature. He further opined that even if the deceased 
was given proper and best treatment, her chances of survival were 
minimal. Hence, the postmortem report and the statement of PW-4 
as such establish that the deceased died of septicaemia as a result 
of 80-90% burn injuries which were superficial. 
13.	 There is another witness named Dr. Gurumurthy, whose statement 
was recorded as PW-10. He was the doctor who had treated the 
deceased after she was admitted in the Victoria Hospital, Bangalore. 
He stated that he was the in-charge of burns ward of the hospital. 
The deceased was brought to the hospital on 20.07.2000 at around 
11.15 p.m. with a history of burns. She was admitted in the hospital 
at 12:00 midnight. According to the deceased, as informed to him, 
her husband used to quarrel with her frequently. On 20.07.2000, he 
came home at around 11.00 p.m., assaulted her and then poured 
diesel over her, set her on fire and ran away. He stated that there is a 
note to the above effect in the case sheet as well. He had examined 
the deceased on 23.07.2000 and she made the said statement at 
around 12.30 p.m. on the same day. He even proved ‘Exhibit P-11’, 
the statement of the deceased and his signatures upon it. He further 
stated that the deceased was in hospital up to 24.07.2000 and expired 
at 9.35 a.m. on the said date. 
14.	 One doctor named Dr. HC Ramanna, PW-11, also treated the 
deceased when she was admitted to the Victoria Hospital. He stated 
that on 20.07.2000 while he was working in the aforesaid hospital, a 
patient by name Chennamma was brought to the hospital in a burnt 
state. He had examined the patient and had noticed that she had 
9 per cent burns on the face and neck, 18 per cent burns on the 
chest and abdomen, 9 per cent on the upper right and left limbs, 
10 per cent on the lower right and left limbs and that the total burns 
received by her were to the extent of 80 per cent. The patient was 
conscious when he had examined her. She was admitted by him to 
the burns ward. On the morning of 21.07.2000 at about 02:45 am 

582
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(i.e. in the night itself), the police of S.R. Nagar came to the hospital 
and requested him to give permission to record the statement of the 
patient. Since the patient was conscious and in a position to give the 
statement, he gave permission to the police to record her statement. 
The statement was recorded as Exhibit P-12 and he had made an 
endorsement on it under his signatures that the patient was in a fit 
condition to give a statement. He even proved the endorsement and 
his signatures on Exhibit P-12. In his cross-examination, nothing 
material turned up except that he admitted that in the OPD slip, it 
is mentioned that she herself had poured kerosene and had set fire 
to herself, but he does not know who recorded the said statement 
on the OPD slip/case sheet (Exhibit P-11). He further admitted that 
though according to his examination the burns were to the extent 
of 80 per cent but he does not know why the burns were recorded 
to be 98 per cent. He denied the suggestion that the endorsement 
on Exhibit P-12 was made by him to support the prosecution under 
any pressure.
15.	 The aforesaid evidence of the two doctors who examined the 
deceased clearly proves that the deceased was admitted to the 
hospital as alleged on 20.07.2000 and that despite serious injuries, 
she was in a conscious state. The attending doctors have certified 
that she was in a fit position to make a statement and, therefore, 
permission was granted to the police to record her statement which 
is Exhibit P-12 which bear the endorsement and signature of the 
doctor. We see no reason to disbelieve the evidence of PW-4, 
PW-10 and PW-11.
16.	 The dying declaration of the deceased was recorded by the Head 
Constable working in the SR Nagar Police Station. His statement 
was recorded as PW-15. He categorically stated that he had 
remained posted in the aforesaid police station from 1997 to May, 
2003 meaning thereby that he was posted at the aforesaid police 
station at the time the alleged incident took place and the deceased 
was taken and admitted to the hospital. He further stated that on 
the said date he was on night duty and at about 01:30 am, the 
Station House Officer having received information of the deceased 
being admitted in the hospital, had asked him to go and record her 
statement. He as such reached the hospital at 02:00 am and met 
the doctor of the burns ward of the hospital. He informed him that 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
583
Subramani v. State of Karnataka
he had come to record the statement of the deceased. The doctor 
after talking to the deceased for about two minutes informed him 
that the patient was in a position to give the statement. He permitted 
him to record the statement, whereupon he recorded her statement 
for about half an hour. The deceased put her thumb (LTI) on the 
statement recorded by him as she was not in a position to put her 
signatures. The statement was endorsed by the doctor who certified 
the condition of the deceased and signed the statement. He proved 
the statement Exhibit P-12, the endorsement and the certificate of 
the doctor and his signatures upon it. 
17.	 The translated copy of the statement (Exhibit P-12) was not placed 
before us, though the original in vernacular language exists in the 
record. The same was proved by PW-15, as stated earlier. He stated 
that the deceased told him that she was married to the appellant 
and had lived happily with him for about 2-3 years but thereafter 
the appellant had started quarrelling with her demanding her to 
bring more money from her parents. He started treating her cruelly 
by abusing and beating her. On 20.07.2000, he quarrelled with her 
and forced her to get more money from her parents. In the night, 
he again picked up a quarrel with her and assaulted her. He then 
abused her and even threatened to kill her. He poured kerosene 
on her body and set her on fire. At that time her four children were 
sleeping in the house and on hearing her cries, they went to their 
grandmother’s house and called her. 
18.	 Considering the circumstances and the evidence of PW-3, PW-4, 
PW-10 and PW-11 coupled with the fact that there is no adverse 
material to doubt the above dying declaration or to suggest that it 
was not actually or properly recorded or that the deceased was not 
in a state to make such a statement, there is no reason to disbelieve 
the dying declaration.
19.	 The fact that the aforesaid PW-15 admitted that there was no nurse 
present at the hospital when he recorded the statement, is not enough 
to belie the above dying declaration. The same was recorded in the 
night at about 02:00-02:30 am with the permission of the doctor who 
has accepted having granted the permission on being satisfied that 
the deceased was in a fit state to make the statement. In the light 
of the above statements of the doctors and the police officer, the 
oral evidence of PW-7 and PW-16 that she was not conscious to 

584
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
give any statement, is not reliable. The deceased, may have been 
momentarily in an unconscious state due to the effect of sedatives, 
however, by and large, as the burn injuries were superficial, though 
to great extent, she was conscious most of the time and was in a 
fit state of mind to get her dying declaration recorded.
20.	 This apart, the police had recovered a matchbox, a kerosene tin 
and burnt cloth pieces from the site of the incident immediately. The 
Recovery Memo was duly prepared in the form of Exhibit P-1. The 
said exhibit was proved by the PW-6, D. Rangaswamy, one of the 
neighbours who had visited the house of the deceased immediately 
on the occurrence of the incident. He has stated that the matchbox, 
kerosene tin and burnt cloths were lying at the scene, a mahazar 
was prepared on the spot and the aforesaid items were collected and 
seized by the police. He had signed the mahazar prepared by the 
police which is before him as Exhibit P-1 and bears his signatures. 
He denied the suggestion that he was making a false statement.
21.	 The fact of recovery of the kerosene tin, matchbox and burnt cloth 
pieces from the scene of the incident, the deposition of PW-3, the 
daughter of the appellant and the deceased that she had seen her 
father bringing kerosene tin, pouring it on her mother and putting 
her on fire, coupled with the dying declaration and the statements of 
the doctors PW-10, PW-11 who examined and treated the deceased 
and PW-4 who conducted the post-mortem, in unequivocal terms 
prove that the appellant alone is responsible for the commission 
of the aforesaid offences. He is the person who picked up quarrel 
with his deceased wife, poured kerosene and burnt her and that his 
wife died due to the burn injuries after consciously making a dying 
declaration and naming the appellant as the main culprit. 
22.	 In view of the above clinching pieces of evidence, there is hardly 
any scope for the acquittal of the appellant.
23.	 The Trial Court was not justified in acquitting the appellant on slight 
discrepancies in the statements of some of the witnesses, particularly 
PW-7 and PW-16. PW-7 is a person who carried the deceased to 
the hospital and his statement is not very trustworthy. He has not 
deposed about her condition in the hospital. PW-16 is the police 
inspector who conducted the investigation. He might have deposed 
that the deceased was not in a conscious state of mind but that would 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
585
Subramani v. State of Karnataka
not override the statement of the doctors who treated the deceased, 
especially the one who was on duty and had permitted the police 
to record the statement of the deceased on being satisfied that she 
was in a fit condition to make a statement. 
24.	 In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of the 
opinion that the High Court is perfectly justified in the facts and 
circumstances of the case that the appellant is guilty of commission 
of offences both under Sections 498A and 302 IPC and has rightly 
been convicted and sentenced to the imprisonment awarded.
25.	 The appeal, as such, is devoid of merit and is dismissed. The 
appellant is on bail. He is directed to surrender forthwith to undergo 
the remaining part of the sentence.
26.	 Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
