[2026] 3 S.C.R. 314 : 2026 INSC 217
Pooranmal
v.
The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1266 of 2026)
10 March 2026
[Vikram Nath, Sandeep Mehta* and N.V. Anjaria, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the conviction of the appellant-P based solely on 
circumstantial evidence as convicted by the trial court and upheld by 
the High Court could be sustained in law. Whether the incriminating 
evidence are proved by cogent and admissible evidence, forming 
an unbroken chain pointing unequivocally towards the guilt of the 
appellant.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – ss.302/34, 201 – Bhartatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 – ss.103(1)/3(5) – Circumstantial evidence – 
Recoveries – Appellant-P along with one L, committed murder 
of wife of L – Appellant-P and L were convicted by the trial 
Court for the offence punishable u/ss.302/34 and s.201 of 
the Penal Code, 1860 – The common appeal preferred by the 
accused persons against their conviction was rejected by the 
High Court – SLP filed by L was dismissed by this Court in 
limine – The appellant-P who was unable to prefer an appeal 
owing to poverty and lack of access to legal assistance, has 
now filed the present appeal through legal aid – Interference 
warranted or not:
Held: As emerging from the impugned judgments of the trial 
Court and the High Court, the case of the prosecution pertaining 
to the murder is based purely on circumstantial evidence viz. call 
detail records, recovery of blood-stained shirt and the recovery of 
currency notes – The law governing cases resting on circumstantial 
evidence is no longer res integra – Mere recovery of currency 
notes, in the absence of any cogent evidence establishing a clear 
nexus between the said amount and the crime, would not by itself 
constitute an incriminating circumstance against the appellant – The 
said circumstance was wrongly treated to be incriminating by the 
* Author

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
315
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
trial Court as the recovery itself is doubtful and additionally, the 
mere recovery of currency notes cannot constitute incriminating 
evidence in absence of corroborative evidence – The second 
incriminating article recovered was blood-stained shirt – Even if 
the FSL report shows that the blood found on the shirt allegedly 
recovered at the instance of the appellant matches that of the 
deceased, such finding would by itself not be incriminating in the 
absence of other cogent and corroborative evidence completing the 
chain of circumstances – The last and final piece of circumstantial 
evidence is call details records – In the present case, the certificate 
u/s.65-B of the Evidence Act [s.63 of the BSA] was not proved by 
the prosecution – In the absence of the certificate, mandatorily 
required u/s.65-B of the Evidence Act [s.63 of the BSA], the call 
detail records become inadmissible in evidence and cannot be 
relied upon to support the prosecution’s case – The prosecution 
has miserably failed to establish a complete and coherent chain 
of incriminating circumstances so as to bring home the guilt of the 
appellant – Thus, the conviction of the appellant as recorded by the 
trial Court and affirmed by the High Court cannot be sustained – The 
impugned judgments are hereby set aside. [Paras 26, 27, 33, 52-55]
Case Law Cited
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra [1985] 1 SCR 
88 : (1984) 4 SCC 116; Karandeep Sharma alias Razia alias Raju v. 
State of Uttarakhand [2025] 3 SCR 1482 : 2025 SCC OnLine 
SC 773; Allarakha Habib Memon v. State of Gujarat [2024] 8 
SCR 345 : (2024) 9 SCC 546; Anvar P.V. v. P.K. Basheer [2014] 
11 SCR 399 : (2014) 10 SCC 473; Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v. 
Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal [2020] 7 SCR 180 : (2020) 7 
SCC 1 – relied on.
List of Acts
Penal Code 1860; Evidence Act, 1872; Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; Bhartatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
List of Keywords
Circumstantial evidence; Chain of custody; Corroborative 
evidence; Unbroken chain of custody; Call details records; 
Recovery of blood-stained cloth; Recovery of currency notes; 

316
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Electronic evidence; Requirement of certificate u/s.65-B of 
Evidence Act; Admissibility of electronic evidence; Coherent chain 
of incriminating circumstances.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1266 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.03.2018 of the High Court 
of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur in DBCRA No. 238 of 2012
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Yuvraj Kashyap, Ms. Vijetha J., Ms. Ranjeeta Rohatgi.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Kartikeya Asthana, Ms. Nidhi Jaswal.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Mehta, J.
1.	
Heard.
2.	
Leave granted.
3.	
The appellant, Pooranmal1, along with one Ladu Lal faced trial in 
Sessions Case No. 33 of 2010 before the Court of the Additional 
Sessions Judge, (Women Atrocities Cases), Bhilwara, Rajasthan2. 
Both the accused were convicted by the trial Court vide judgment 
and order dated 8th February, 2012, for the offence punishable under 
Sections 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 18603 [Sections 103 
(1)/3(5) of the Bhartatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 20234] and were sentenced 
to undergo life imprisonment and fine of Rs. 5,000/- with default 
stipulation. Both the accused were also convicted for the offence 
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as “appellant-Pooranmal”.
2	
Hereinafter, referred to as “trial Court”.
3	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘IPC’.
4	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘BNS’.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
317
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
punishable under Section 201 of the IPC [Section 238 of the BNS] 
and sentenced to undergo seven years rigorous imprisonment and 
fine of Rs. 5,000/- with default stipulation. Both the sentences were 
ordered to run concurrently.
4.	
The common appeal being DB Criminal Appeal No. 238 of 2012 
preferred by the accused persons against their conviction stands 
rejected by the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur5 
vide judgment and order dated 16th March, 2018. It may may be 
mentioned here that Ladu Lal assailed the said judgment of the 
High Court by preferring Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 1071 of 
2022, which has been dismissed by this Court in limine vide order 
dated 7th February, 2022.
5.	
The appellant-Pooranmal who was unable to prefer an appeal owing 
to poverty and lack of access to legal assistance, has now filed the 
present appeal through legal aid.
6.	
Vide order dated 28th January, 2026, we took note of the distinguishing 
features inter se between the case of the appellant-Pooranmal and 
that of the co-convict Ladu Lal and issued notice in the present 
appeal. The case of the prosecution as against the co-convict Ladu 
Lal was based on recoveries as well as the reverse burden of proof 
as provided under Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 18726 
(Section 109 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 20237). In contrast, 
insofar as the appellant-Pooranmal is concerned, the prosecution’s 
case rests purely on recoveries and call detail records. It was in 
these circumstances and remaining conscious of the dismissal of the 
special leave petition preferred by the co-convict Ladu Lal, that we 
deemed it appropriate to entertain the special leave petition filed on 
behalf of the appellant-Pooranmal through legal aid, notwithstanding 
the significant delay of 2749 days, which stands condoned by the 
aforesaid order.
BRIEF FACTS
7.	
Succinctly stated, the facts relevant and essential for disposal of this 
appeal are noted hereinbelow.
5	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘High Court’.
6	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘Evidence Act’.
7	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘BSA’. 

318
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
8.	
The case as set up by the prosecution is that the appellant-Pooranmal 
along with the co-convict Ladu Lal, committed murder of Aruna, wife 
of Ladu Lal, in the latter’s house on the night intervening 2nd March, 
2010 and 3rd March, 2010. 
9.	
The written report of the incident (Ex. P-40) was lodged by none 
other than Ladu Lal before the Station House Officer, Police Station 
Bijolia alleging inter alia that he was sleeping in the drawing room 
of his house with his son Devender. His wife, Smt. Aruna, was 
sleeping in the adjacent room. At about 1:30 am, he got up to attend 
the call of nature and found that his room was bolted from outside. 
He tried calling Smt. Aruna on her mobile number, but she did not 
respond. On this, he called his brother, Satyanarayan (PW.2), and 
upon receiving no response, he called his acquaintance Shankar 
Singh Rathore, posted as constable at the Police Station Bijolia. 
Thereafter, some people gathered at the spot and opened his room 
from outside. Upon proceeding to the adjoining room, they found 
Smt. Aruna lying on the bed with visible injuries, including a wound 
on her left temple, along with signs of struggle. On checking closely, 
they realised that Smt. Aruna was dead. The almirah situated near 
the dead body was lying open, and a sum of approximately Rs. 
4 lakh was missing therefrom. Ladu Lal alleged in the report that 
some unknown persons had murdered his wife by inflicting injuries 
on her head and requested the police to take action. On the basis of 
said report, FIR No. 28 of 2010 came to be registered at the Police 
Station Bijolia under Section 460 of the IPC (Section 331(8) of the 
BNS). The usual investigation was undertaken. The dead body was 
subjected to inquest proceedings and subsequently forwarded to the 
Medical Jurist for postmortem examination. 
10.	 During the course of investigation, Ladu Lal was interrogated and 
looking to his evasive response, the needle of suspicion turned 
towards him and he was accordingly arrested. Ladu Lal made a 
confession/disclosure statement (Ex. P-42) and based thereupon, 
the appellant-Pooranmal was also apprehended in the present case. 
The Investigating Officer, Dalpat Singh (PW.22)8, thereafter effected 
recoveries of a blood-stained shirt and a sum of Rs.46,000/-, in 
furtherance of the disclosure statements made by the appellant-
Pooranmal.
8	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘Investigating Officer (PW.22)’.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
319
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
11.	 The Investigating Officer (PW.22) collected the call details of mobile 
Nos. 978****222 and 977****299 belonging to the accused persons, 
which led to the conclusion that the appellant-Pooranmal and Ladu 
Lal were continuously in contact with each other, proximate to the 
probable time of the incident. 
12.	 Upon conclusion of investigation, chargesheet came to filed against 
two accused persons i.e. the appellant-Pooranmal and Ladu Lal 
for the offences punishable under Sections 302/34 and 201 of the 
IPC [Sections 103 (1)/3(5) and 238 of the BNS]. Since the offence 
punishable under Section 302 of the IPC [103 (1) of the BNS] was 
exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions, the case was committed 
and made over to the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge, (Women 
Atrocities Cases), Bhilwara, Rajasthan for trial. The trial Court framed 
charges against both the accused who pleaded not guilty and claimed 
trial. The prosecution examined twenty-four witnesses (PW.1 to 
PW.24) and exhibited fifty-five documents (Ex. P-1 to P-55) along 
with seven articles (Ex. A-1 to A-7) to prove its case.
13.	 The accused, upon being questioned under Section 313 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 [Section 351 of the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023] denied the prosecution allegations and 
claimed to be innocent. Three witnesses (DW.1 to DW.3), and eight 
documents (Ex. D-1 to D-8) were exhibited in defence. 
14.	 As stated above, the trial Court vide judgment and order dated 8th 
February, 2012 convicted and sentenced the appellant-Pooranmal 
and the co-accused for the offences mentioned above.9
15.	 The appeal preferred by the appellant-Pooranmal against his 
conviction has been rejected by the High Court vide judgment and 
order dated 16th March, 2018 and hence, this appeal by special leave.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
16.	 Learned counsel appearing for the appellant-Pooranmal, vehemently 
and fervently contended that the conviction of the appellant-Pooranmal 
recorded by the trial Court, and affirmed by the High Court, is 
based purely on conjectures and surmises. It was submitted that 
9	
Supra para 3.

320
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the prosecution’s case rests entirely on circumstantial evidence and 
that there is no credible or reliable evidence on record of the case 
so as to connect the appellant-Pooranmal with the alleged crime. 
17.	 The learned counsel urged that the recovery of the blood-stained 
shirt allegedly made at the instance of the appellant-Pooranmal does 
not inspire confidence. The call detail records cannot be admitted in 
evidence because the mandatory certificate under Section 65-B of 
the Evidence Act [Section 63 of the BSA] was never proved.
18.	 The learned counsel further contended that the recovery of the 
currency notes cannot be treated to be incriminating because there 
is no credible evidence to show that these currency notes had, 
as a matter of fact, been given to the appellant-Pooranmal by the 
co-convict Ladu Lal for committing the murder of Smt. Aruna.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
19.	 Per contra, learned counsel representing the State opposed the 
submissions advanced by the appellant’s counsel. It was submitted 
that the special leave petition filed by the co-convict against the 
self-same impugned judgment, having been rejected by this Court, 
there is no reason for this Court to take a different view in the case 
of the appellant-Pooranmal.
20.	 It was further submitted that the Investigating Officer (PW.22) has 
given unimpeachable evidence proving the grave incriminating 
recoveries of the blood-stained shirt and the currency notes made 
at the instance of the appellant-Pooranmal. The shirt upon being 
examined at the serological department of the Forensic Science 
Laboratory10 tested positive (FSL Report Ex. P-49) for the presence 
of the same blood group (O) as that of the deceased-Aruna. The 
appellant-Pooranmal failed to offer any explanation as to how the 
shirt worn by him at the time of the incident was bearing stains of 
the same blood group as that of the deceased-Aruna. The failure 
of the appellant-Pooranmal to offer any explanation to this gravely 
incriminating circumstance requires drawing of adverse inference.
21.	 It was further submitted that the call detail records are gravely 
incriminating. The appellant-Pooranmal failed to offer any explanation 
10	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘FSL’. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
321
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
for the extensive contact with the main accused Ladu Lal proximate 
to the time of the occurrence. Thus, these incriminating call detail 
records were rightly relied upon by the trial Court and the High Court 
for drawing the inference of guilt against the appellant-Pooranmal. 
22.	 It was further contended that the call detail records were proved 
by the nodal officers of the service providers, i.e. Vibhor Rastogi 
(PW.23) and Saurabh Kumar (PW.24) and hence, non-production 
of the certificate under Section 65-B of the Evidence Act [Section 63 
of the BSA] pales into insignificance. Mere non-production of the 
certificate under Section 65-B of the Evidence Act [Section 63 of the 
BSA] in this case cannot be treated to be fatal to the prosecution’s 
case, particularly, when the call detail records have been duly proved 
by examining the employees of the service providers i.e., Vodafone 
and Bharati Hexacom Ltd./Bharati Heckjakom Ltd.
23.	 The learned counsel also urged that the appellant-Pooranmal hails 
from a poor family and as such, his being in possession of such a 
large sum of money soon after the incident is a gravely incriminating 
circumstance for which the appellant-Pooranmal could not offer 
any explanation. Thus, by virtue of Section 106 of the Evidence Act 
[Section 109 of the BSA], the burden shifted on to the appellant-
Pooranmal to explain as to how he came into possession of the huge 
sum of money recovered from his house pursuant to the disclosure 
made by him under Section 27 of the Evidence Act [Proviso to 
Section 23 of the BSA].
24.	 On the aforesaid grounds, learned counsel submitted that the 
concurrent and well-reasoned findings recorded against the accused 
by the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court, i.e. convicting the 
appellant-Pooranmal and upholding his conviction do not warrant 
interference. He thus implored the Court to dismiss the appeal.
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
25.	 We have heard and considered the submissions advanced by 
learned counsel for the appellant-Pooranmal and learned standing 
counsel appearing for the State. We have also carefully perused the 
impugned judgments and sifted the evidence available on record.
26.	 Suffice it to say that, as emerging from the impugned judgments of the 
trial Court and the High Court, the case of the prosecution pertaining to 

322
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the murder of Smt. Aruna is based purely on circumstantial evidence. 
Insofar as the appellant-Pooranmal is concerned, the prosecution’s 
case rests upon following three incriminating circumstances: -
i.	
Call detail records indicating continuous and frequent 
conversation between the appellant-Pooranmal and co-convict 
Ladu Lal corresponding to the time of the incident.
ii.	
The recovery of blood-stained shirt, having same blood group 
as that of Smt. Aruna, in furtherance of the disclosure made 
by the appellant-Pooranmal under Section 27 of the Evidence 
Act [Proviso to Section 23 of the BSA].
iii.	
The recovery of currency notes totalling Rs.46,000/-, purportedly 
paid by co-convict Ladu Lal to the appellant-Pooranmal for 
committing murder of Smt. Aruna.
27.	 The law governing cases resting on circumstantial evidence is no 
longer res integra. It would, therefore, be apposite to advert to the 
salient principles enunciated by this Court in Sharad Birdhichand 
Sarda v. State of Maharashtra11, wherein the parameters for 
appreciation of circumstantial evidence have been authoritatively 
and succinctly laid down:-
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that 
the following conditions must be fulfilled before a case 
against an accused can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the 
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should 
be fully established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that 
the circumstances concerned “must or should” 
and not “may be” established. There is not only a 
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may 
be proved” and “must be or should be proved” 
as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao 
Bobade v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 
793] where the observations were made: [SCC 
para 19, p. 807]
11	
(1984) 4 SCC 116.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
323
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
“Certainly, it is a primary principle that the 
accused must be and not merely may be guilty 
before a court can convict and the mental 
distance between ‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is 
long and divides vague conjectures from sure 
conclusions.”
(2) the facts so established should be 
consistent only with the hypothesis of the 
guilt of the accused, that is to say, they 
should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,
(3) the circumstances should be of a 
conclusive nature and tendency,
(4) they should exclude every possible 
hypothesis except the one to be proved, and
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so 
complete as not to leave any reasonable 
ground for the conclusion consistent with 
the innocence of the accused and must show 
that in all human probability the act must 
have been done by the accused.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
28.	 Bearing the aforesaid principles in mind, we shall now proceed to 
examine and analyse the evidence led by the prosecution to prove 
the circumstances relied upon by it for bringing home the guilt of 
the appellant-Pooranmal. 
I.	
RECOVERY OF CURRENCY NOTES
29.	 At the outset, we may take note of the fact that there is a grave 
discrepancy regarding the exact amount of currency notes recovered 
by the Investigating Officer (PW.22) purportedly in furtherance of the 
disclosure statement made by the appellant-Pooranmal.
30.	 Whilst in the examination-in-chief, the Investigating Officer (PW.22) 
deposed that the appellant-Pooranmal furnished an information under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act [Proviso to Section 23 of the BSA] 

324
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
regarding receipt of the amount of Rs.46,000/- (Ex. P-44) from Ladu 
Lal pursuant to a plan to commit the murder of Smt. Aruna. 
31.	 The Investigating Officer (PW.22) further stated that in consequence 
of the said disclosure, as also another disclosure pertaining to 
the shirt allegedly worn at the time of the incident, the appellant-
Pooranmal led the police party to his residence and got recovered 
a shirt (suspected to be blood-stained) kept in an iron box. The said 
recovery was reduced into writing vide memo (Ex. P-9), and the shirt 
was sealed at the spot. Further as per the information given by the 
appellant-Pooranmal, a sum of Rs.46,000/- was recovered from his 
house and was seized vide memo (Ex. P-13). The said amount was 
also sealed at the spot.
32.	 In cross-examination, the Investigating Officer (PW.22) admitted 
that though on the chit of material exhibit (Ex. P-52), the currency 
notes were mentioned as Rs.46,000/-, but when the notes were 
counted in Court, it was noticed that the amount was Rs.46,145/-. 
The Investigating Officer (PW.22) admitted that there was no mention 
of these extra Rs.145 on the packet marked as (Ex. P-52). 
33.	 Thus, the very factum of recovery of the currency notes comes under 
a grave cloud of doubt. That apart, mere recovery of currency notes, 
in the absence of any cogent evidence establishing a clear nexus 
between the said amount and the crime, would not by itself constitute 
an incriminating circumstance against the appellant-Pooranmal. Thus, 
the said circumstance was wrongly treated to be incriminating by the 
trial Court as the recovery itself is doubtful and additionally, the mere 
recovery of currency notes cannot constitute incriminating evidence 
in absence of corroborative evidence.
II.	
RECOVERY OF BLOOD-STAINED SHIRT
34.	 The second incriminating article recovered at the instance of the 
appellant-Pooranmal was the blood-stained shirt which upon being 
analysed at the FSL purportedly gave a positive test for the presence 
of the same blood group (O) as that of the deceased-Aruna. From 
the evidence of the Investigating Officer (PW.22), it transpires that 
the recovery of the shirt was effected in furtherance of the disclosure 
statement of the appellant-Pooranmal (Ex. P-43). The recovery memo 
of the shirt was proved as (Ex. P-9). 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
325
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
35.	 We may observe that the appellant-Pooranmal herein was a free 
bird since the day of incident i.e. from intervening night of 2nd and 
3rd March, 2010 until 4th March, 2010, when he came to be formally 
arrested in connection with the present case, after being implicated 
by the co-convict Ladu Lal. The recovery memo (Ex. P-9) indicates 
that the appellant-Pooranmal had meticulously concealed the shirt 
in an iron box and when the same was recovered, it was bearing 
blood stains. To our mind, it is highly improbable and unnatural that 
the appellant-Pooranmal, who was a free bird, would have taken 
such great pains to conceal the shirt so meticulously rather than 
simply destroying it by burning. Furthermore, even if the appellant-
Pooranmal was desirous of preserving the shirt, all that was required 
to obliterate the blood stains was to wash the same. Hence, we are 
of the firm view that the recovery of the shirt is totally unreliable. 
36.	 The recovery of the shirt was held to be incriminating based on the 
FSL report (Ex. P-49) as per which the blood stains on the shirt 
tested positive for the presence of O blood group being the same as 
that of the deceased-Aruna. For treating the FSL report (Ex. P-49) 
to be admissible, the prosecution would have to prove the complete 
chain of custody establishing the sanctity of the sealed articles right 
from the time of the seizure till the time they reached the FSL. In 
this regard, we would like to refer to the evidence of the following 
witnesses:-
a.	
Mathura Singh (P.W.19)
37.	 Mathura Singh (PW.19), the Head Constable in-charge of the 
malkhana at Police Station Bijolia, stated that on 6th March, 2010 
the Investigating Officer (PW.22) deposited blood-stained tissues 
and shirt in a sealed cloth bag. An entry to this effect was made in 
the malkhana register at Serial No. 227. On 7th March, 2010, the 
Investigating Officer (PW.22) deposited a sealed bag containing 46 
notes of Rs.1,000/- each, totalling Rs. 46,000/-. The witness (PW.19) 
stated that these articles, which also included the articles/samples 
recovered from the crime scene and the t-shirt recovered at the 
instance of the co-convict Ladu Lal, bearing marks A, B, C, L, M 
(totalling five), were forwarded with constable Surender Singh (PW.16) 
to SP office Bhilwara on 15th March, 2010 for being deposited at the 
FSL accompanied by requisite documents. However, because the 
FSL forwarding letter was not yet prepared, the said articles were 

326
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
returned and handed back to said witness (PW.19) who redeposited 
the same in the malkhana with an endorsement made in the malkhana 
register (Ex. P-37).
38.	 These very articles were again taken out from the malkhana on 
18th March, 2010 and handed over to Surender Singh (PW.16) for 
delivery to FSL. Surender Singh (PW.16) proceeded to Udaipur 
and deposited the samples at the FSL on 19th March, 2010. He 
thereafter returned on 20th March, 2010 along with the receipt 
evidencing such deposit.
39.	 The witness (PW.19) was confronted with the malkhana entry in his 
cross-examination and stated as below: -
“It is wrong to say that I had given the material to Surendra 
Singh on 12.3.10 for taking to F.S.L. and that due to some 
shortage in it, the material were returned on 15.3.l0. Ex.D.3 
The copy of the Malkhana which was attached with the 
challan in the file, in the C-D part of which it is written that 
the material were sent on 12.3.10 is wrong.”
b.	
Surendra Singh (P.W.16)
40.	 The Carrier Constable, Surender Singh (PW.16), emphatically stated 
that he carried the malkhana articles to the FSL on 18th March, 2010, 
deposited them at the FSL, Udaipur on 19th March, 2010 and brought 
back the receipt. In his cross-examination, the witness (PW.16) stated 
that he did not recollect taking the same articles to the S.P. office on 
12th March, 2010. He was confronted with the malkhana register (Ex. 
D-3), which records that he had been handed the samples on 12th 
March, 2010 and had attempted to deposit them at the S.P. Office 
on 15th March, 2010. However, he feigned ignorance as to the said 
entry recorded in the official document (Ex.D-3). 
41.	 On a holistic appreciation of the evidence of these two witnesses, 
it becomes clear that there is a grave discrepancy regarding the 
safe-keeping/chain of custody of the muddamal articles. It is clearly 
discernible from the evidence of Mathura Singh (PW.19) that the 
muddamal articles were sent out of the police station prior to 18th 
March, 2010, to be precise on 15th March, 2010, but the same 
were returned from the FSL because of some defects. The precise 
reason for return of the muddamal articles is not forthcoming in the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
327
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
evidence of the prosecution witnesses. The Carrier Constable (PW.16) 
categorically denied having carried the samples on any date prior 
to 18th March, 2010. 
42.	 The entry made in the malkhana register (Ex. D-3) with which both 
the witnesses were confronted, completely demolishes the versions 
of PW.19 and PW.16. In this entry, it is clearly recorded that the 
muddamal articles were forwarded to the FSL on 12th March, 2010. 
Utter failure of the prosecution to disclose as to the reasons for which 
the samples were returned from the FSL breaches the unbroken 
chain of custody mandatorily required to prove the safe keeping of 
the muddamal articles.
43.	 In Karandeep Sharma alias Razia alias Raju v. State of 
Uttarakhand12, this Court emphasised that for a DNA/FSL report to be 
acceptable and reliable, the prosecution must establish an unbroken 
chain of custody and demonstrate that the samples remained duly 
sealed and untampered throughout, and held as follows:-
“54. In order to make the DNA report acceptable, reliable 
and admissible, the prosecution would first be required to 
prove the sanctity and chain of custody of the samples/
articles right from the time of their preparation/collection 
till the time they reached the FSL. For this purpose, the 
link evidence would have to be established by examining 
the concerned witness.
55. Evidently, there is not even a semblance of evidence 
on record to satisfy the Court that the samples/articles 
collected from the dead body of the child-victim and those 
collected from the appellant which were later forwarded to 
the FSL were properly sealed or that the same remained 
in a self-same condition right from the time of the seizure 
till they reached the FSL. No witness from the FSL was 
examined by the prosecution to prove that the samples/
articles were received in a sealed condition. Hence, 
there is every possibility of the samples being tampered/
manipulated by the police officers so as to achieve a 
favourable result from the FSL, thereby, inculpating the 
appellant in the crime.”
12	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 773.

328
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
44.	 In view of the analysis of evidence made above, we are of the firm view 
that the requisite link evidence essential to prove the safe-keeping 
and sanctity of the muddamal articles is lacking and the chain of 
custody has been breached beyond reprieve, thereby, making the 
FSL report (Ex. P-49) redundant and a worthless piece of paper.
45.	 Moreover, this Court in Allarakha Habib Memon v. State of 
Gujarat13, expounded that even if the FSL report establishes that 
the blood group detected on the article recovered at the instance of 
the accused matches that of the deceased, such circumstance by 
itself is not sufficient to link the said accused with the crime. This 
Court observed as follows:- 
“42. The trial court as well as the High Court heavily 
relied upon the FSL reports (Exts. 111-115) for finding 
corroboration to the evidence of the eyewitnesses and in 
drawing a conclusion regarding culpability of the appellants 
for the crime. We may reiterate that the testimony of the 
so-called eyewitnesses has already been discarded above 
by holding the same to be doubtful. Thus, even presuming 
that the FSL reports (Exts. 111-115) conclude that the 
blood group found on the weapons recovered at the 
instance of the accused matched with the blood group 
of the deceased, this circumstance in isolation, cannot 
be considered sufficient so as to link the accused 
with the crime.
43. In this regard, reliance can be placed on the judgment 
of Mustkeem v. State of Rajasthan [Mustkeem v. State 
of Rajasthan, (2011) 11 SCC 724 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 
473] , wherein this Court held that sole circumstance of 
recovery of bloodstained weapon cannot form the basis 
of conviction unless the same was connected with the 
murder of the deceased by the accused. The relevant 
portion is extracted hereinbelow : (SCC p. 730, para 19) 
“19. The AB blood group which was found 
on the clothes of the deceased does not by 
itself establish the guilt of the appellant unless 
13	
(2024) 9 SCC 546.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
329
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
the same was connected with the murder of 
the deceased by the appellants. None of the 
witnesses examined by the prosecution could 
establish that fact. The blood found on the 
sword recovered at the instance of Mustkeem 
was not sufficient for test as the same had 
already disintegrated. At any rate, due to the 
reasons elaborated in the following paragraphs, 
the fact that the traces of blood found on the 
deceased matched those found on the recovered 
weapons cannot ipso facto enable us to arrive 
at the conclusion that the latter were used for 
the murder.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
46.	 Thus, even if the FSL report (Ex. P-49) shows that the blood found 
on the shirt allegedly recovered at the instance of the appellant-
Pooranmal matches that of the deceased-Aruna, such finding would 
by itself not be incriminating in the absence of other cogent and 
corroborative evidence completing the chain of circumstances.
47.	 Thus, neither the recovery of the currency notes is reliable, nor the 
recovery of the shirt inspires confidence. In addition thereto, the link 
evidence having not been proved, the FSL report (Ex. P-49) pales 
into insignificance.
III.	
CALL DETAIL RECORDS
48.	 The last and final piece of circumstantial evidence relied upon by 
the prosecution to bring home the charges against the appellant-
Pooranmal pertains to the call detail records. 
49.	 Section 65-B of the Evidence Act [Section 63 of the BSA] mandates 
that electronic evidence in form of a computer output (call detail 
records) can only be admitted in evidence upon satisfaction of the 
mandatory conditions prescribed under Section 65-B (4) of the 
Evidence Act [Section 63(4) of the BSA], which reads as follows: -
“(4) In any proceedings where it is desired to give a 
statement in evidence by virtue of this section, a certificate 
doing any of the following things, that is to say, --

330
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(a) identifying the electronic record containing 
the statement and describing the manner in 
which it was produced;
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved 
in the production of that electronic record as 
may be appropriate for the purpose of showing 
that the electronic record was produced by a 
computer;
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which 
the conditions mentioned in sub-section (2) 
relate, and purporting to be signed by a person 
occupying a responsible official position in 
relation to the operation of the relevant device 
or the management of the relevant activities 
(whichever is appropriate) shall be evidence of 
any matter stated in the certificate; and for the 
purposes of this subsection it shall be sufficient 
for a matter to be stated to the best of the 
knowledge and belief of the person stating it.
(Emphasis supplied)
50.	 This position of law was cemented by this Court in the case of Anvar 
P.V. v. P.K. Basheer14, wherein it was held as follows: -
“14. Any documentary evidence by way of an electronic 
record under the Evidence Act, in view of Sections 59 
and 65-A, can be proved only in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed under Section 65-B. Section 65-B 
deals with the admissibility of the electronic record. The 
purpose of these provisions is to sanctify secondary 
evidence in electronic form, generated by a computer. It 
may be noted that the section starts with a non obstante 
clause. Thus, notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Evidence Act, any information contained in an electronic 
record which is printed on a paper, stored, recorded 
or copied in optical or magnetic media produced by a 
14	
(2014) 10 SCC 473.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
331
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
computer shall be deemed to be a document only if the 
conditions mentioned under sub-section (2) are satisfied, 
without further proof or production of the original. The very 
admissibility of such a document i.e. electronic record which 
is called as computer output, depends on the satisfaction 
of the four conditions under Section 65-B(2). Following 
are the specified conditions under Section 65-B(2) of the 
Evidence Act:
(i) The electronic record containing the 
information should have been produced by 
the computer during the period over which the 
same was regularly used to store or process 
information for the purpose of any activity 
regularly carried on over that period by the 
person having lawful control over the use of 
that computer;
(ii) The information of the kind contained in 
electronic record or of the kind from which the 
information is derived was regularly fed into 
the computer in the ordinary course of the said 
activity;
(iii) During the material part of the said period, 
the computer was operating properly and that 
even if it was not operating properly for some 
time, the break or breaks had not affected either 
the record or the accuracy of its contents; and
(iv) The information contained in the record 
should be a reproduction or derivation from the 
information fed into the computer in the ordinary 
course of the said activity.
15. Under Section 65-B(4) of the Evidence Act, if it is 
desired to give a statement in any proceedings pertaining 
to an electronic record, it is permissible provided the 
following conditions are satisfied:
(a) There must be a certificate which identifies 
the electronic record containing the statement;

332
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(b) The certificate must describe the manner 
in which the electronic record was produced;
(c) The certificate must furnish the particulars 
of the device involved in the production of that 
record;
(d) The certificate must deal with the applicable 
conditions mentioned under Section 65-B(2) of 
the Evidence Act; and
(e) The certificate must be signed by a person 
occupying a responsible official position in 
relation to the operation of the relevant device.
16. It is further clarified that the person need only to state in 
the certificate that the same is to the best of his knowledge 
and belief. Most importantly, such a certificate must 
accompany the electronic record like computer printout, 
compact disc (CD), video compact disc (VCD), pen drive, 
etc., pertaining to which a statement is sought to be given 
in evidence, when the same is produced in evidence. All 
these safeguards are taken to ensure the source and 
authenticity, which are the two hallmarks pertaining to 
electronic record sought to be used as evidence. Electronic 
records being more susceptible to tampering, alteration, 
transposition, excision, etc. without such safeguards, the 
whole trial based on proof of electronic records can lead 
to travesty of justice.
17. Only if the electronic record is duly produced in terms 
of Section 65-B of the Evidence Act, would the question 
arise as to the genuineness thereof and in that situation, 
resort can be made to Section 45-A—opinion of Examiner 
of Electronic Evidence.
18. The Evidence Act does not contemplate or permit 
the proof of an electronic record by oral evidence if 
requirements under Section 65-B of the Evidence Act 
are not complied with, as the law now stands in India.” 
(Emphasis Supplied)

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
333
Pooranmal v. The State of Rajasthan & Anr.
51.	 Subsequently, this Court in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v. Kailash 
Kushanrao Gorantyal15, reaffirmed and clarified the position laid 
down in Anvar P.V. (supra), observing that the requirement of a 
certificate under Section 65-B of the Evidence Act [Section 63 of 
the BSA] for admissibility of electronic evidence is mandatory and 
cannot be dispensed with, and held as follows:- 
“61. We may reiterate, therefore, that the certificate required 
under Section 65-B(4) is a condition precedent to the 
admissibility of evidence by way of electronic record, as 
correctly held in Anvar P.V. [Anvar P.V. v. P.K. Basheer, 
(2014) 10 SCC 473 : (2015) 1 SCC (Civ) 27 : (2015) 1 
SCC (Cri) 24 : (2015) 1 SCC (L&S) 108], and incorrectly 
“clarified” in Shafhi Mohammad [Shafhi Mohammad v. 
State of H.P., (2018) 2 SCC 801 : (2018) 2 SCC 807 : 
(2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 346 : (2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 351 : (2018) 
1 SCC (Cri) 860 : (2018) 1 SCC (Cri) 865] . Oral evidence 
in the place of such certificate cannot possibly suffice as 
Section 65-B(4) is a mandatory requirement of the law. 
Indeed, the hallowed principle in Taylor v. Taylor [Taylor v. 
Taylor, (1875) LR 1 Ch D 426] , which has been followed 
in a number of the judgments of this Court, can also be 
applied. Section 65-B(4) of the Evidence Act clearly states 
that secondary evidence is admissible only if led in the 
manner stated and not otherwise. To hold otherwise would 
render Section 65-B(4) otiose.”
52.	 Admittedly, in the present case, the certificate under Section 65-B 
of the Evidence Act [Section 63 of the BSA] was not proved by the 
prosecution. In the absence of the certificate, mandatorily required 
under Section 65-B of the Evidence Act [Section 63 of the BSA], 
the call detail records become inadmissible in evidence and cannot 
be relied upon to support the prosecution’s case.
CONCLUSION
53.	 In view of the discussion made above, we are of the opinion that the 
prosecution has miserably failed to establish a complete and coherent 
chain of incriminating circumstances so as to bring home the guilt 
15	
(2020) 7 SCC 1.

334
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the appellant-Pooranmal. Neither were the so-called incriminating 
circumstances proved by cogent and admissible evidence, nor do 
they form an unbroken chain pointing unequivocally towards the guilt 
of the appellant-Pooranmal.
54.	 As an upshot of the above discussion, we have no hesitation in 
concluding that the prosecution has failed to bring home the charges 
against the appellant-Pooranmal and the impugned judgments do 
not stand to scrutiny. 
55.	 Consequently, conviction of the appellant-Pooranmal as recorded by 
the trial Court and affirmed by the High Court cannot be sustained. 
Hence, the impugned judgments are hereby set aside. The appellant-
Pooranmal is acquitted of the charges. He is in custody and shall 
be released forthwith, if not wanted in any other case.
56.	 The appeal is accordingly allowed in the above terms.
57.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
