[2026] 3 S.C.R. 525 : 2026 INSC 228
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai
v.
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
(Civil Appeal No(s). 3277-78 of 2026)
11 March 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari* and Atul S. Chandurkar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the arbitral award deserves to be set aside on the ground 
of lack of jurisdiction due to improper constitution of the arbitral 
tribunal or patent illegality.
Headnotes†
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – ss.16, 34, 37, 4 – 
Constitution of Arbitral Tribunal – Interpretation of arbitration 
clause – Waiver – The Appellant-MCGM had floated a tender 
and invited proposals – The stipulated duration for completion 
of the work under the Agreement was 72 months and the 
contract was designed to be implemented in stages – The 
work under the contract was completed – A dispute arose 
in respect of payment of outstanding dues – On 09.08.2005, 
the Respondent invoked the arbitration clause as contained 
in the Agreement – On 07.07.2009, MCGM filed an application 
u/s.16 of the 1996 Act, challenging the appointment of the 
Presiding Arbitrator as a ‘nullity’ and seeking consequential 
reliefs – Arbitral Tribunal dismissed the application holding 
that the appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator was valid – 
On 05.06.2010, the Tribunal passed the final award, directing 
MCGM to pay specified amounts – Application seeking setting 
aside of the arbitral award u/s.34 of the 1996 Act was filed 
before the High Court – The Single Judge of the High Court 
dismissed the application – An appeal was preferred u/s.37 of 
the 1996 Act – High Court dismissed the appeal and confirmed 
the judgment and order of the Single Judge – Correctness:
Held: 1. In the facts of this case, it cannot be said that the Arbitral 
Tribunal has been improperly constituted in derogation of the 
* Author

526
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
arbitration agreement, or that the interpretation of the arbitration 
clause as made by the Arbitral Tribunal has resulted in any patent 
illegality, which would warrant setting aside of the award – As such, 
the High Court has rightly decided not to interfere with the arbitral 
award u/s.34(2)(a)(v) or s.34(2A) while rejecting the application to 
set aside the award. [Para 37]
2. The MCGM raised their objection for the first time, addressing 
the letter dated 20.02.2009 to the Presiding Arbitrator, alleging 
that his appointment is a ‘nullity’ since the Co-Arbitrators had not 
succeeded in appointing the third arbitrator within 30 days and 
therefore had no power to appoint – In the facts of this case, 
beyond 30 days from the date of appointment of the second 
Arbitrator, i.e. 07.10.2005, the MCGM agreed to attempt mediation / 
conciliation by its letter dated 07.01.2006 and then informed the 
Co-Arbitrators about there being no mediation / conciliation by its 
letter dated 15.12.2006 – MCGM passively sat idle while three 
different persons were appointed as the Presiding Arbitrator under 
Clause 8.3(b) of the Agreement by the Co-Arbitrators, without any 
demur. [Paras 54, 63]
3. In the present case, the MCGM was completely aware about the 
non-compliance of a contractual requirement under the arbitration 
agreement – It proceeded with the arbitration process without any 
demur, agreed to keep the arbitration proceedings in abeyance to 
pursue other methods of dispute resolution (mediation / conciliation), 
and did not object to such non-compliance on three different 
occasions when such alleged non-compliance took place – In 
such a case, filing of an application u/s.16 of the 1996 Act cannot 
regularize or condone its conduct and such conduct is a relevant 
consideration to decipher its understanding of the contractual terms 
while deciding the s.16 application on merits by the Tribunal even 
in the absence of statutory waiver u/s.4 being attracted – A party 
cannot keep a ‘jurisdictional ace’ up their sleeve and then claim 
that filing of the jurisdictional challenge u/s.16 would go back in 
time and wipe out the past conduct and acquiescence of the party 
which would clearly evince how the contractual terms were viewed 
by the parties – If the same is permitted, it will erode the basic 
principles of alternative dispute resolution and ethos of arbitration. 
[Paras 66, 67]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – ss.16, 4 – Conduct, 
Acquiescence and waiver – Discussed. [Paras 39-42, 55, 56]

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
527
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
Case Law Cited
Hindustan Construction Co. Ltd. v. Bihar Rajya Pul Nirman Nigam 
Ltd., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2578; Narayan Prasad Lohia v. 
Nikunj Kumar Lohia [2002] 1 SCR 1136 : (2002) 3 SCC 572 – 
relied on.
Consolidated Construction Consortium Limited v. Software 
Technology Parks of India, 2025 INSC 574 : [2025] 4 SCR 
1846; SEPCO Electric Power Construction Corporation v. GMR 
Kamalanga Energy Ltd., 2025 INSC 1171; Quippo Construction 
Equipment Ltd. v. Janardan Nirman (P) Ltd. [2020] 6 SCR 272 : 
(2020) 18 SCC 277 – referred to.
List of Acts
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
List of Keywords
Principle of party autonomy; Co-arbitrators; Jurisdictional ace; 
Dispute resolution; forum non conveniens; Section 16 of Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996; Mediation/conciliation; Non-compliance 
of the arbitration agreement; Waiver of right; Conduct; Constitution 
of Arbitral Tribunal; Arbitral autonomy; Acquiescence; Waiver; 
Minimum judicial interference; Appointment of arbitrator.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 3277-3278 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 04.07.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in ARBA (L) No. 4339 of 2024 in IA (L) 
No. 7312 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Siddharth Bhatnagar, Sr. Adv., Ms. Ananya Nair, Ms. Nivedita Nair, 
Ms. Asha Gopalan Nair.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Shyam Divan, Sr. Adv., Ms. Riddhi Sancheti, Ms. Tanjul Sharma, 
Mukul Kulhari, Raghav Bhatia.

528
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The instant appeal(s) are directed against the judgment dated 
04.07.2025 of the High Court of Bombay (hereinafter referred to as 
“High Court”) in Arbitration Appeal (L) No. 4339 of 2024 with Interim 
Application (L) No. 7312 of 2024.
3.	
By the impugned judgement, the High Court dismissed the appeal of 
the Appellant – Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (hereinafter 
referred to as “MCGM”) under Section 37 of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as “1996 Act”) and 
confirmed the judgment and order dated 19th and 20th of October, 
2022 of the learned Single Judge in Arbitration Petition No. 84 of 
2012 dismissing the application filed under Section 34 of the 1996 
Act by MCGM for setting aside the award dated 05.06.2010 of a 
three-member Arbitral Tribunal.
4.	
The challenge made in the proceedings of Section 34 was threefold - 
improper constitution of the tribunal, limitation and interest. However, 
before us, the Appellant has confined their arguments only to the 
question of lack of jurisdiction due to improper constitution of the 
tribunal. As such, our examination of the facts of the case is confined 
to the question of validity of constitution of the tribunal.
FACTS
5.	
The facts shorn of unnecessary details are that the MCGM had 
floated a tender and invited proposals for ‘Consultancy Services to 
Upgrade Sewerage Operations & Maintenance Services’. The scope 
of work of the contract was for providing consultancy in upgrading 
the sewage and sewerage handling facilities, operations and routine 
maintenance protocols. This was a World Bank funded project and 
the Respondent turned out to be the successful bidder in association 
with PHE Consultants, Mumbai. Pursuant thereto, an agreement 
dated 18.09.1995 (hereinafter referred to as the “Agreement”) was 
entered into between the MCGM and M/s R.V. Anderson Associates 
Ltd., which is an engineering firm based out of Canada.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
529
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
6.	
The stipulated duration for completion of the work under the 
Agreement was 72 months and the contract was designed to be 
implemented in stages. The work under the contract was completed 
on 20.06.2001 and a final report was submitted by the Respondent 
to the MCGM. At that stage, a dispute arose in respect of payment 
of outstanding dues. A meeting was held on 24.10.2002 where the 
Respondent’s claims were discussed and rejected by MCGM except 
to make partial payments on 17.02.2004.
7.	
When things stood as thus, on 09.08.2005, the Respondent 
invoked the arbitration clause as contained in the Agreement. 
Vide communication dated 09.08.2005, received by the MCGM 
on 14.09.2005, the Respondent invoked the arbitration clause, 
particularly clause 8.3(b) of the Agreement and appointed Hon’ble 
Mr. Justice S.M. Jhunjhunwala (Retd.) as their nominee arbitrator. 
On 07.10.2005, the MCGM appointed Mr. Sharad Upasani, former 
IAS officer as their nominee arbitrator.
8.	
On 04.11.2005, a meeting was held between the Appellant and the 
Respondent, where the parties discussed about exploring a possibility 
of conciliation or mediation. In reference to the said meeting, another 
letter dated 08.11.2005 was sent by the Respondent to MCGM, 
seeking to explore non-binding conciliation or mediation and in the 
meanwhile, on confirmation by the MCGM, the arbitration proceedings 
be put in abeyance. The said letter dated 08.11.2005 was also marked 
to Justice Jhunjhunwala (Retd.) and Mr. Upasani. The MCGM, by 
writing letter dated 07.01.2006 acknowledged the intention of the 
Respondent to keep arbitration proceedings in abeyance and to 
start conciliation proceedings.
9.	
After a while, the Respondent wrote letters dated 12.02.2006 and 
27.02.2006 to the MCGM, requesting to participate in the conciliation. 
It appears from the record that steps were not taken by the parties to 
explore the possibility of settlement and nothing was materialized. On 
15.12.2006, MCGM addressed a letter to Mr. Upasani, informing him 
that there was no conciliation pursuant to the letter dated 08.11.2005 
and that Respondent was delaying the appointment of arbitrators.
10.	 On 08.01.2007, the Respondent wrote a letter to the MCGM stating 
that since MCGM no longer seems to be inclined to explore mediation 
and conciliation, the arbitration proceedings may continue and the 
two arbitrators may proceed to appoint the third arbitrator in terms 
of the contract.

530
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
11.	 The two nominee arbitrators jointly appointed Justice D.R. Dhanuka 
(Retd.) as the Presiding Arbitrator by their letter dated 30.04.2007. 
The Presiding Arbitrator issued the notice for preliminary meeting 
vide communication dated 09.05.2007. 
12.	 At this stage, Respondent by their letter dated 28.05.2007, objected 
to the appointment of Justice Dhanuka (Retd.) in reference to Clause 
8.6 of the Agreement, inter alia stating that the presiding arbitrator 
must not be of Indian or Canadian nationality. As such, Justice 
Dhanuka (Retd.) tendered his resignation as the Presiding Arbitrator 
on 28.06.2007.
13.	 The two Co-Arbitrators, prior to appointing another presiding arbitrator, 
then addressed a letter dated 17.09.2007 to both the Respondent 
and the MCGM, seeking information as to whether the parties are 
“still interested in the conduct of the pending arbitral proceedings”. 
The Respondent replied on 29.09.2007 conveying their intention 
to continue with the arbitration proceedings and requested both 
Co-Arbitrators to proceed with the appointment of the Presiding 
Arbitrator. However, the MCGM did not reply in response to the said 
letter. Thereafter, the Co-Arbitrators appointed Mr. John Savage 
as the Presiding Arbitrator on 24.04.2008, who also tendered his 
resignation on 11.08.2008.
14.	 On 21.10.2008, the Co-Arbitrators wrote to Mr. Anwarul Haque of 
Singapore for appointment as the Presiding Arbitrator, who conveyed 
his acceptance on 29.10.2008. Finally, on 12.11.2008, the learned 
Co-Arbitrators informed the parties that Mr. Anwarul Haque had 
been appointed as the Presiding Arbitrator and that a preliminary 
meeting was scheduled on 08.12.2008, which was first rescheduled 
to 09.12.2008 and again rescheduled to 09.01.2009.
15.	 The preliminary meeting of the Arbitral Tribunal was conducted on 
09.01.2009 which was duly attended by both the parties as evinced 
from the Minutes of the Preliminary Meeting of the Arbitral Tribunal. 
After the said meeting, MCGM, addressing a letter on 20.02.2009 to 
the Presiding Arbitrator, alleged that the appointment of the Presiding 
Arbitrator was contrary to the terms of the Agreement, hence a ‘nullity’. 
It was said that the learned Co-Arbitrators could not have made the 
appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator beyond 30 days from the 
date of nomination of the second arbitrator. It was stated that the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
531
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
Presiding Arbitrator, therefore, has ‘no right’ to be an Arbitrator and 
requested that the Presiding Arbitrator ought to withdraw himself 
from being an Arbitrator in the matter.
16.	 A written objection to the letter dated 20.02.2009 was addressed 
by Respondent through its letter dated 09.03.2009. Thereafter, the 
Respondent submitted its statement of claim before the Arbitral 
Tribunal on 20.03.2009. It was at this stage, the MCGM filed an 
application under Section 16 of the 1996 Act, challenging the 
appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator as a ‘nullity’ and seeking 
consequential reliefs.
17.	 The learned Arbitral Tribunal, by its order dated 17.07.2009, 
(hereinafter referred to as “Section 16 order”) dismissed the 
application by a detailed order, holding that the appointment of the 
Presiding Arbitrator was valid.
18.	 On 05.06.2010, the Tribunal passed the final award, directing MCGM 
to pay specified amounts in United States Dollars (hereinafter referred 
to as “USD”) and in Indian Rupees (hereinafter referred to as “INR”). 
The Tribunal, under the final award, directed the payment as follows:
I.	
USD 2,078,349.25 and INR 14,76,736 along with interest 
amount on USD 1,089,926.88 and INR 1,51,596 at the rate of 
14% per annum calculated from 16th June, 2004 till payment 
or realization, whichever is earlier.
II.	
USD 55,217 and INR 15,57,500 along with USD 42,815 and 
INR 4,07,500 quantified as the cost of arbitration.
19.	 A corrigendum to the final award was passed on 29.06.2010, 
making some corrections to the amount payable by the MCGM to 
the Arbitrators. After the payments were made, the award was finally 
issued and released to the MCGM on 10.08.2011.
20.	 The application seeking setting aside of the arbitral award under 
Section 34 of the 1996 Act was filed before the High Court on 
04.11.2011. The learned Single Judge of the High Court pronounced 
its judgement dismissing the said application on 19th and 20th of 
October, 2022. An appeal was preferred under Section 37 of the 
1996 Act before the Division Bench of the High Court which has been 
dismissed vide the Impugned Order. Upon filing the present appeals 
by the Appellant, notice was issued vide order dated 29.08.2025 and 
the operation of the impugned order was stayed.

532
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
FINDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL AND HIGH COURT
21.	 The main thrust of the jurisdictional challenge as raised by the 
Appellant is that the Presiding Arbitrator had been appointed after the 
expiration of 30 days from 07.10.2005, i.e., the day when the MCGM 
had appointed its nominee arbitrator. It has been contended by the 
Appellant throughout that as per Clause 8.3(b) of the Agreement, once 
period of 30 days had expired, the Arbitral Tribunal was rendered 
coram non judice and the Co-Arbitrators had no power to appoint 
the Presiding Arbitrator, who could have only been appointed by 
the Secretary General of the International Centre for Settlement of 
Investment Disputes, Washington D.C. (hereinafter referred to as 
“ICSID”).
Tribunal’s findings
22.	 The learned Arbitral Tribunal, while dismissing the challenge laid 
out to its jurisdiction in the application filed under Section 16 of 
the 1996 Act, found that the provision to approach the Secretary 
General of the ICSID for appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator was 
merely an enabling provision, which did not denude the power of 
the Co-Arbitrators to appoint the Presiding Arbitrator. It was found 
that in this case, admittedly, neither party has made a reference to 
the Secretary General of ICSID and as such, the power of the Co-
Arbitrators to appoint the Presiding Arbitrator cannot be said to be 
ousted. The Tribunal observed that since arbitral proceedings were 
kept in abeyance on the request of the parties, hence, no fault can be 
found with the decision of the Co-Arbitrators to appoint the Presiding 
Arbitrator. It was held that the conduct of MCGM in participating in 
the arbitral process amounts to waiver under Section 4 of the 1996 
Act and the decision to challenge the appointment of the Presiding 
Arbitrator was barred by limitation.
Findings of the High Court in the Section 34 order
23.	 Learned Single Judge dismissed the application vide order dated 
19th and 20th October, 2022. On the question of jurisdiction, it was 
found that the interpretation of Clause 8.3(b) made by the Tribunal 
is not just a possible or plausible or reasonable view, but rather it is 
the only reasonable view, therefore, interference by ‘setting aside’ 
the award under Section 34 is not warranted. The Court observed 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
533
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
that in case the clause is interpreted in a manner that once the 30-
day period had expired, the Co-Arbitrators had no power to appoint 
the Presiding Arbitrator and had to wait indefinitely for the parties to 
approach the ICSID, it will lead to absurdity and incongruity since 
there was no time limit for the parties to approach the ICSID. In 
such a situation, the Arbitrators could not be said to be completely 
powerless after their appointment.
Findings of the High Court in the Section 37 order
24.	 The High Court, while dismissing the appeal under Section 37 of the 
1996 Act vide the Impugned Order has approved the interpretation of 
Clause 8.3(b) as made by the learned Single Judge and the Arbitral 
Tribunal. The Court observed that while exercising appellate power 
under Section 37, the Court cannot sit in appeal over interpretation of 
the contractual clauses by the Arbitrator merely because a different 
interpretation of the said clause is possible. Since the appointment 
of the arbitrator is in line with the provisions of Clause 8.3(b) of the 
Agreement, no interference is warranted.
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED
25.	 Learned Senior Counsel Mr. Siddharth Bhatnagar for the MCGM, 
argued with vehemence that the arbitral award deserves to be set 
aside due to improper constitution of the tribunal and the award 
lacks jurisdiction. It has been submitted that the Arbitral Tribunal, 
learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court have 
interpreted and substituted the contractual scheme as agreed by the 
parties, which militates against the principle of party autonomy. It has 
been urged that Clause 8.3(b) of the Agreement permits a period 
of 30 days from the date of appointment of the latter Arbitrator for 
the arbitrators to jointly appoint the Presiding Arbitrator, after which 
the Tribunal is rendered coram non judice and loses its power to 
appoint the Presiding Arbitrator. In such a case, he submits, the 
only way the Presiding Arbitrator could have been appointed, would 
have been by the parties approaching the Secretary General of the 
ICSID since use of the word ‘shall’ in Clause 8.3(b) of the Agreement 
makes this the only possible interpretation of the contractual terms. 
As such, entire arbitral process becomes ‘non-est’ in law due to a 
foundational jurisdictional defect which is incurable.

534
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
26.	 The above said arguments have been met with equal vehemence 
by the learned Senior Counsel Mr. Shyam Divan appearing for the 
Respondent. He submitted that the Tribunal has passed a detailed 
award after interpreting the clauses of the Agreement and the 
question of jurisdiction has been aptly dealt with by the learned 
Arbitral Tribunal. He further contended that once the award has 
been passed by the Arbitral Tribunal, the scope of interference at 
the stage of a challenge under Section 34 of the 1996 Act is limited. 
Such scope of interference is even more limited in an appeal under 
Section 37 of the 1996 Act and more so in a special leave petition 
arising out of the said appeal. It is urged that once the learned Arbitral 
Tribunal has reached a conclusion with respect to interpretation of 
the contract, there is no scope for re-interpretation and the Courts 
must not sit in appeal in these proceedings merely because a 
different view may be possible. He has urged assiduously that Clause 
8.3(b) is an enabling clause and not a restricting clause, it merely 
provides an additional avenue for the parties to seek appointment 
of the Presiding Arbitrator before the Secretary General of ICSID in 
case there is an impasse and the Co-Arbitrators fail to appoint the 
Presiding Arbitrator within the prescribed time period of 30 days. 
It is argued that neither party took recourse before the ICSID as 
specified under this clause and as such, MCGM has waived its 
right to challenge the appointment of arbitrator after having actively 
participated in the arbitration. It is therefore, submitted that the 
jurisdictional challenge is an afterthought, after the arbitral process 
was well underway and is hit by waiver.
ANALYSIS OF SUBMISSIONS
27.	 Having heard learned counsel for the parties at length and on perusal 
of the facts and material placed on record, the short question which 
falls for our consideration is whether the arbitral award deserves to 
be set aside on the ground of lack of jurisdiction due to improper 
constitution of the arbitral tribunal or patent illegality?
Interpretation of Clause 8.3(b) of the Agreement
28.	 The instant jurisdictional challenge hinges on Clause 8.3(b) of the 
Agreement and its interpretation by the learned Arbitral Tribunal. 
Clause 8 of the Agreement is of utmost relevance in this case, and 
is therefore reproduced as thus:

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
535
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
“8. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
8.1 Amicable Settlement
The Parties shall use their best efforts to settle amicably all 
disputes arising out of or in connection with this contract 
or the interpretation thereof.
8.2 Right to Arbitration
Any dispute between the Parties as to matters arising 
pursuant to this Contract which cannot be settled amicably 
within thirty (30) days after receipt by one Party of the 
other Party’s request for such amicable settlement may 
be submitted by either Party to arbitration in accordance 
with the provisions of Clauses 8.3 through 8.7 hereinafter.
8.3 Selection of Arbitrators
Each dispute submitted by a Party to arbitration shall be 
heard by a sole arbitrator or an arbitration panel composed 
of three arbitrators, in accordance with the following 
provisions:
(a) Where the Parties agree that the dispute to appoint a 
sole arbitrator or, failing agreement on the identity of such 
sole arbitrator within thirty (30) days after receipt by the 
other Party of the proposal of a name for such appointment 
by the Party who initiated the proceedings, either Party 
may apply to the Federation Internationale des Ingenieurs-
Conseil (FIDIC) of Lausanne, Switzerland for a list of not 
fewer than five nominees and on receipt of such list, the 
Parties shall alternately strike names therefrom, and the last 
remaining nominee on the list shall be the sole arbitrator 
for the matter in dispute. If the last remaining nominee 
has not been determined in this manner within sixty (60) 
days of the date of the list. FIDIC shall appoint upon the 
request of either Party and from such list or otherwise, a 
sole arbitrator for the matter in dispute.
(b) Where the Parties do not agree that the dispute 
concerns a technical matter, the Client and Consultants 
shall each appoint one arbitrator, and these two arbitrators 

536
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
shall jointly appoint a third arbitrator, who shall chair the 
arbitration panel. If the arbitrators named by the Parties 
do not succeed in appointing a third arbitrator within thirty 
(30) days after the latter of the two arbitrators named by 
the Parties has been appointed, the third arbitrator shall, at 
the request of either Party, be appointed by the Secretary 
General of the International Centre for Settlement of 
Investment Disputes, Washington D.C.
(c) If, in a dispute subject to Clause 8.3(b), one Party fails 
to appoint its arbitrator within thirty (30) days after the other 
Party has appointed its arbitrator, the Party which has 
named an arbitrator may apply to the Secretary General 
of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment 
Disputes, Washington D.C. to appoint a sole arbitrator 
for the matter in dispute, and the arbitrator appointed 
pursuant to such application shall be the sole arbitrator 
for that dispute.
8.4 Rules of Procedure
Except as stated herein, arbitration proceedings shall 
be conducted in accordance with the rules of procedure 
for arbitration of the United Nations Commission of 
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) as in force on the 
date of this Contract.
8.5 Substitute Arbitrators
If for any reason an arbitrator is unable to perform his 
function, a substitute shall be appointed in the same 
manner as the original arbitrator.
8.6 Nationality and Qualifications of Arbitrations
The sole arbitrator or the third arbitrator appointed pursuant 
to paragraphs (a) through (c) of Clause 8.3 hereof shall be 
an internationally recognized legal or technical expert with 
experience in relation to the matter in dispute and shall 
not be a national of the Consultants’ home country or of 
the Government. For the purpose of this clause, “home 
country” means any of:
(a) the country of incorporation of the Consultants or

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
537
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
(b) the country in which the Consultants’ (or any of their 
Members’) principal place of business is located; or
(c) the country of nationality of a majority of the Consultants’ 
(or of any Members’) shareholders; or
(d) the country of nationality of the Subconsultant 
concerned, where the dispute involves a subcontract.
8.7 Miscellaneous
In any arbitration proceeding hereunder:
(a) proceedings shall, unless otherwise agreed by the 
Parties, be held in Bombay;
(b) the English language shall be the official language for 
all purposes; and
(c) the decision of the sole arbitrator or of a majority of 
the arbitrators (or of the third arbitrator if there is no such 
majority) shall be final and binding and shall be enforceable 
in any court of competent jurisdiction, and the Parties 
hereby waive any objection to or claims of immunity in 
respect of such enforcement.”
29.	 On a plain reading, Clause 8.3(b) provides that the parties shall each 
appoint one arbitrator and if the two arbitrators do not succeed in 
appointing the third arbitrator who shall preside the arbitration panel, 
within 30 days, then, on the request of either party, the ICSID shall 
appoint the third arbitrator. Such is the requirement in respect of 
appointment of the three arbitrators who shall constitute the Arbitral 
Tribunal.
30.	 On an objective perusal of the arbitration clause, it appears to be 
enabling in nature. It does not provide that in case the two arbitrators 
do not succeed in appointing the third arbitrator within the period so 
prescribed, the two arbitrators will lose their power of appointment 
of the third arbitrator. Rather, the power of appointment of the third 
arbitrator acts in an independent sphere when juxtaposed with the 
second part of the clause which is enabling in nature, permitting 
the parties to approach the ICSID after 30 days, in case the two 
arbitrators appointed by the parties reach an impasse and do not 
succeed in making such appointment.

538
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
31.	 The consequence of non-appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator 
within the prescribed period has not been specified in the Agreement. 
In fact, the clause merely grants liberty to the parties to seek the 
appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator, after a period of 30 days, 
before the ICSID. The intent of the parties while drafting the arbitration 
clause could not have been to withdraw the power to appoint the 
Presiding Arbitrator from the Co-Arbitrators appointed by the parties 
upon expiry of 30 days from the date of appointment of the second 
arbitrator, otherwise, it would have certainly found mention in the 
Agreement. The intent of the clause appears to be that in case both 
Arbitrators cause a delay in appointment of the third arbitrator, the 
parties retain the authority to remedy the delay and after 30 days of 
such non-appointment, they have liberty to apply before the ICSID to 
address the delay and upon making such a request, the ICSID shall 
appoint the third Arbitrator. Hence, in absence of such a stipulation 
in the said clause and looking to the intent of the language used, the 
Court while exercising its jurisdiction in proceedings arising out of 
Section 34 of the 1996 Act, cannot read something into the contract 
which it does not explicitly provide.
32.	 The manner in which a contract is understood and acted upon by the 
parties is the best aid to interpreting the contract and understanding 
the intent of the parties while drafting the contract. The Arbitral Tribunal 
has interpreted the arbitration clause in a manner which is certainly 
plausible, holding that it is enabling in nature, on the contingency 
that an application is made by either party before the ICSID. We 
are in complete agreement with the said view, however, addressing 
the contentions made before us, it is seen that the initial part of 
Clause 8.3(b), “Where the Parties do not agree that the dispute 
concerns a technical matter, the Client and Consultants shall each 
appoint one arbitrator, and these two arbitrators shall jointly appoint 
a third arbitrator, who shall chair the arbitration panel.” lays down the 
composition of the arbitral tribunal and their method of appointment, 
it vests the power of appointment of the third arbitrator with the Co-
Arbitrators appointed by the parties. The subsequent part of Clause 
8.3(b) reads “If the arbitrators named by the Parties do not succeed 
in appointing a third arbitrator within thirty (30) days after the latter 
of the two arbitrators named by the Parties has been appointed, the 
third arbitrator shall, at the request of either Party, be appointed by 
the Secretary General of the International Centre for Settlement of 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
539
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
Investment Disputes, Washington D.C.”. This deals with a contingency 
which breaks into three critical components, firstly, the contingency is 
triggered upon the expiration of the thirty-day period from the date of 
appointment of the second arbitrator without the appointment of the 
third arbitrator; secondly, the condition precedent is that a request 
must be made by either party, meaning thereby that the Secretary 
General of ICSID does not have the power to act sua sponte (on 
its own accord); and thirdly, by using the word ‘shall’, the mandate 
is that once such a request is made by either party, the Secretary 
General of ICSID is required to make such appointment.
33.	 The parties have, in their commercial wisdom, drafted a ‘fail-safe’ 
into the arbitration clause to deal with a contingency where the Co-
Arbitrators fail to appoint the third arbitrator, so as not to leave the 
dispute resolution process in the balance. They have retained with 
themselves the power to approach the ICSID and make a request 
for appointment of the third arbitrator in case of such a contingency. 
At the very first instance, when the Co-Arbitrators did not succeed in 
appointing the third arbitrator within thirty days of the appointment of 
Mr. Upasani, neither party exercised the option to approach the ICSID. 
If the parties had exercised such an option upon the contingency 
being triggered, certainly an argument could have been made that 
despite a request being made before the ICSID, the Co-Arbitrators 
have proceeded to appoint the third arbitrator and therefore the arbitral 
tribunal is improperly constituted. In the present case, however, the 
parties have not exercised the option to approach the ICSID and 
non-exercise of the contingency cannot make the initial part of the 
arbitration clause otiose. It certainly cannot be said that after the 
period of thirty days, the power of the Co-Arbitrators to appoint the 
third arbitrator was completely extinguished.
34.	 Much emphasis has been placed by the learned Senior Counsel 
Mr. Bhatnagar on the use of the word ‘shall’ in Clause 8.3(b) to 
argue that once the 30-day period from the date of appointment of 
the second arbitrator elapses, the only way to appoint the Presiding 
Arbitrator is through the Secretary General of ICSID. We are unable 
to agree with this submission since the word ‘shall’ has been used 
to enable the parties and the ICSID to proceed in the matter, upon 
a request being made by either party, upon the non-appointment of 
third, i.e. Presiding arbitrator, otherwise it will lead to procedural and 

540
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
commercial absurdity. By using ‘shall’ in the clause, the responsibility 
has been cast on the Secretary General of the ICSID to appoint the 
third Arbitrator only upon a request made by either of the parties. It 
provides a mandate that the President of the ICSID shall mandatorily 
appoint the third arbitrator and this mandate is based on the condition 
precedent, i.e., a request being made by either of the parties. It is 
nobody’s case that a request has been made by either party before 
the ICSID after 30 days and prior to appointment of the Presiding 
Arbitrator by the Co-Arbitrators. The enabling clause is permissive 
and only attracts when the condition precedent of making a request 
before the ICSID is satisfied. The parties have, in their wisdom and 
in a specific circumstance, retained the power and liberty, to make 
a request before the ICSID, which shall appoint the third arbitrator. 
The clause cannot, therefore, be read to be restrictive in nature as 
contended by the Appellant, however, this Court is inclined to reject 
this argument in line of the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal.
35.	 Another important factor is that once the arbitrators were appointed 
by the respective parties, which initiated the arbitration by sending 
a notice, it cannot be said that the arbitrators have to indefinitely 
wait for the parties to apply before the ICSID in order to appoint the 
Presiding Arbitrator and for the arbitration to proceed. If such an 
interpretation is made, it will lead to commercial irrationality, since 
until the parties approach the ICSID, the two arbitrators would be 
left in a state of limbo. This could not have been the intent of the 
parties within the framework of party autonomy and from the conduct 
of the parties, which will be discussed in the subsequent part of 
this judgement, the parties never interpreted the contract in such a 
manner. In view of the aforesaid discussion, it cannot be said that 
the parties would want their contract to become unworkable and 
for the dispute resolution clause to work in such a manner that the 
arbitrators appointed by the parties after invocation of arbitration 
would wait indefinitely for either of the parties to approach the ICSID 
seeking appointment of the third arbitrator.
36.	 Of course, while saying so we are cognizant of the sacrosanct principle 
of party autonomy and the fact that Courts cannot substitute the 
commercial wisdom of parties as is borne out from the plain meaning 
of the words used in the contract. However, Clause 8.3(b) has been 
rightly interpreted by the learned Arbitral Tribunal in the Section 16 
order and the matter has been dealt with in the right perspective 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
541
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
by the learned Single Judge in Section 34 and the learned Division 
Bench in the Section 37 appeal. The law in respect of the scope of 
interference permissible in proceedings arising out of a challenge to 
the arbitral award under Section 34 of the 1996 Act, is well settled. 
Generally, the scope of interference is quite narrow. The arbitrator is 
the master of evidence and so also of interpretation of the terms of 
contract. If the arbitrator has reached at a certain view with respect to 
interpretation which is plausible, interference is not warranted merely 
because some other view may also be possible. This is a settled 
principle of law which has been recently reiterated in the decisions 
of this Court in Consolidated Construction Consortium Limited v. 
Software Technology Parks of India1 and SEPCO Electric Power 
Construction Corporation v. GMR Kamalanga Energy Ltd.2 The 
role of the Court, in the proceedings arising out of Section 34 of the 
1996 Act, is clearly demarcated. The approach of the Court must be 
to respect arbitral autonomy and ensure minimum judicial interference.
37.	 As rightly observed by the learned Arbitral Tribunal in the Section 16 
order as well as the High Court, this is not a case where the Arbitral 
Tribunal has been composed completely outside the scope of the 
agreement and a procedure alien to the agreement has been adopted 
to appoint the arbitrators. The difference in interpretation is merely 
as to whether the third arbitrator could only have been appointed by 
the Secretary General of ICSID or by the two arbitrators nominated 
by the parties. In any case, in the facts of this case, it cannot be 
said that the Arbitral Tribunal has been improperly constituted in 
derogation of the arbitration agreement, or that the interpretation of 
the arbitration clause as made by the Arbitral Tribunal has resulted 
in any patent illegality, which would warrant setting aside of the 
award. As such, the High Court has rightly decided not to interfere 
with the arbitral award under Section 34(2)(a)(v) or Section 34(2A) 
while rejecting the application to set aside the award.
Conduct, Acquiescence and Waiver
38.	 Even though we have found that the Arbitral Tribunal has reached 
the right conclusion with respect to interpretation of the arbitration 
1	
2025 INSC 574.
2	
2025 INSC 1171.

542
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
clause as contained in the Agreement and that the appointment 
of the third arbitrator is in line with the arbitration clause, there is 
yet another aspect of the instant matter which we must address, 
since it forms a part of the reasoning of the Section 16 order. Even 
assuming that there is non-compliance of the arbitration agreement 
in appointing the third arbitrator, whether the MCGM has waived its 
right to object to the same due to its conduct?
39.	 Section 16 of the 1996 Act permits the arbitral tribunal to rule on 
its own jurisdiction. It is relevant and is therefore quoted as under:
“16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its 
jurisdiction.
(1) The arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, 
including ruling on any objections with respect to the 
existence or validity of the arbitration agreement, and for 
that purpose, —
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract 
shall be treated as an agreement independent of the 
other terms of the contract; and
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract 
is null and void shall not entail ipso jure the invalidity 
of the arbitration clause.
(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have 
jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the submission 
of the statement of defence; however, a party shall not 
be precluded from raising such a plea merely because 
that he has appointed, or participated in the appointment 
of, an arbitrator.
(3) A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of 
its authority shall be raised as soon as the matter alleged 
to be beyond the scope of its authority is raised during 
the arbitral proceedings.
(4) The arbitral tribunal may, in either of the cases referred 
to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), admit a later plea 
if it considers the delay justified.
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to 
in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) and, where the arbitral 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
543
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea, continue with 
the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award.
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make 
an application for setting aside such an arbitral award in 
accordance with section 34.”
40.	 On the other hand, Section 4 of the 1996 Act deals with waiver of 
right to object. It provides as follows:
“4. Waiver of right to object. –
A party who knows that –
(a) any provision of this Part from which the parties 
may derogate, or
(b) any requirement under the arbitration agreement, 
has not been complied with and yet proceeds with 
the arbitration without stating his objection to such 
non-compliance without undue delay or, if a time 
limit is provided for stating that objection, within that 
period of time, shall be deemed to have waived his 
right to so object.”
41.	 It has been argued by the Respondent that even though a challenge 
to arbitrability was raised by the MCGM under Section 16 of the 
1996 Act, at its core, it is a challenge to non-compliance of the 
requirements under the arbitration agreement with regard to the 
procedure for appointment. In fact, the learned Arbitral Tribunal 
in its order has observed that the challenge by the MCGM is that 
the appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator is a ‘nullity’ and as 
such, the Arbitral Tribunal lacks jurisdiction. In this context, it is 
to be examined whether MCGM has waived its right to object to 
the appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator by the Co-Arbitrators 
appointed by the parties.
42.	 MCGM has claimed before us and also before the Tribunal and the 
High Court that once the period of thirty days had elapsed from the 
date of appointment of the second arbitrator, Mr. Upasani, the Co-
Arbitrators were denuded of their power to appoint the Presiding 
Arbitrator and it was only the Secretary General of ICSID who could 
make such appointment. As discussed, such an interpretation of the 

544
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
arbitral agreement cannot be countenanced. In any case, it is pertinent 
to refer to the conduct of MCGM to understand the aspect of waiver 
and acquiescence and its understanding of the arbitration clause.
43.	 On a perusal of the communication between the parties and the history 
of the present dispute, the authenticity whereof is not disputed by 
either party, it appears that Mr. Upasani was appointed by MCGM on 
07.10.2005. Thereafter, in the meeting dated 04.11.2005, there was 
some discussion between the parties about pursuing conciliation/
mediation which has been referenced in the letter dated 08.11.2005 
by the Respondent to the MCGM, a copy whereof has been forwarded 
to the Co-Arbitrators, Justice Jhunjhunwala (Retd.) and Mr. Upasani. 
The relevant portion of the said letter was as follows:
“…
During the meeting we had with yourself on 04.11.2005 
in your office the possibility of amicably settling the 
issue under dispute through a process of ‘non-binding 
conciliation’ or ‘mediation’ was discussed and positively 
received by yourself.
As we are keen to avoid litigation and we consider it 
appropriate to attempt to amicably resolve issues to the 
fullest extent possible. We, therefore, request you to confirm 
MCGM’s agreement to participate actively in such ‘non-
binding conciliation’ or ‘mediation’ with us, having regard to 
a time limit of six months for (sic) resolution of the issues.
Upon receipt of MCGM’s confirmation of the above, we will 
request the arbitrators to keep the proceedings in abeyance 
while such conciliation proceedings are continuing between 
us and MCGM.
In case the parties are unable to arrive at a mutual 
settlement on all the issues, those issues not amicably 
settled may be taken up by the Arbitrators in the arbitration 
proceedings. We, therefore, await your confirmation within 
15 days of receipt of this letter, so that the Arbitrators 
could be appropriately informed. You are also requested 
to kindly initiate the conciliation proceedings.
…”

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
545
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
44.	 This letter was not replied to by the MCGM until 07.01.2006 when 
the MCGM wrote a letter addressed to the Respondent, relevant 
part whereof has been reproduced:
“…
Dear Sir,
Prejudice to our right, we have noted your intention to keep 
arbitration proceedings in abeyance & start conciliation 
proceedings. It is to inform further that contractors have 
initiated arbitration process in this case without taking 
efforts for resolving the issues of dispute, if any. Please 
note that MCGM’s doors were always open and are open 
for reconciliation, if any.
…”
45.	 It is relevant to note that at this stage, there was no objection raised by 
MCGM that the Co-Arbitrators, due to the operation of Clause 8.3(b), 
after the elapsing of 30 days period from the date of appointment of 
Mr. Upasani, had lost the power to appoint the Presiding Arbitrator 
and to proceed with the arbitration. It has also not been indicated 
that they had applied or that are intending to apply before the ICSID 
for appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator. The intent of the parties 
was clearly to pursue other alternative methods of dispute resolution 
such as mediation or conciliation and to amicably settle the disputes, 
prior to pursuing arbitration with respect to issues which remained 
unsettled.
46.	 It appears from the record that thereafter the parties did not, in fact, 
pursue mediation/conciliation and on 15.12.2006, the MCGM informed 
their nominee arbitrator, Mr. Upasani that there was no conciliation 
and that it was in fact the Respondent which was delaying the 
appointment of Arbitrator in order to ‘get a contract from MCGM’. 
In this letter, the MCGM has also alleged that the appointment of 
Arbitral Tribunal by the Respondent is of no effect, which was under 
examination by the MCGM. It is not explained why the appointment 
made by Respondent was of no effect. It is, however, acknowledged 
by the MCGM that the appointment of arbitrators had been delayed. 
Relevant portion of the letter dated 15.12.2006 has been quoted 
herein for reference:

546
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“…
There was no conciliation as alleged under the letter 
dated 8th November 2005. It appears that the Claimant 
was delaying appointment of Arbitrators to get a contract 
from MCGM.
From the records, we feel that appointment of Arbitral 
Tribunal by Claimant is of no effect. However, MCGM will 
examine the case and report soon.”
47.	 On 08.01.2007, a letter was written by the Respondent to MCGM 
which was received by MCGM on 14.02.2007. The relevant portion 
of the said letter is reproduced below for reference:
“…
However, it now appears, based on MCGM’s above 
referred letter that MCGM does not intend to attempt 
non-binding mediation & conciliation efforts to resolve the 
dispute amicably.
We are therefore left with no option but to continue with 
the arbitration proceedings and request the two arbitrators 
to proceed with the appointment of the third arbitrator in 
accordance with the contract.”
48.	 A copy of this letter was also marked to Justice Jhunjhunwala 
(Retd.) and Mr. Upasani. By means of the letter dated 08.01.2007, 
the Respondent made it clear to MCGM as well as the two learned 
Arbitrators that it is fully intent to proceed with arbitration and in fact, 
explicitly requested them to appoint the third arbitrator. This letter 
was also not replied to by the MCGM. The MCGM did not, at this 
stage, take a plea that due to elapse of 30 days, the Co-Arbitrators 
had lost discretion or competence to appoint the Presiding Arbitrator 
and therefore the Respondent could not have requested the Co-
Arbitrators to appoint the third arbitrator. No objection with respect 
to non-compliance of the terms of the agreement was raised by the 
MCGM.
49.	 It was on 30.04.2007 that the Co-Arbitrators appointed Justice D.R. 
Dhanuka (Retd.) as the Presiding Arbitrator. If MCGM’s argument is 
to be accepted, this would be the first instance of non-compliance 
of the agreement. If in fact it was under the impression that the Co-

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
547
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
Arbitrators had no power to appoint the Presiding Arbitrator, at first 
instance itself, it should have objected to the appointment of Justice 
D. R. Dhanuka (Retd.), which it admittedly did not do. Justice D.R. 
Dhanuka (Retd.), acting in the capacity of the Presiding Arbitrator then 
issued a notice dated 09.05.2007 to both parties for a preliminary 
meeting. At this stage, it was actually the Respondent which raised an 
objection to his appointment by means of their letter dated 28.05.2007, 
alleging non-compliance of Clause 8.6 of the Agreement, since the 
Presiding Arbitrator could not be of Indian origin.
50.	 Justice D.R. Dhanuka (Retd.) withdrew his acceptance to act as the 
Presiding Arbitrator on 28.06.2007 and thereafter, the Co-Arbitrators 
addressed the letter dated 17.09.2007 to both parties, posing a 
question as to whether the parties were still interested in the conduct 
of arbitral proceedings and to continue with the proceedings. Even 
though MCGM did not reply to this letter of the Co-Arbitrators, the 
Respondent replied to the Co-Arbitrators with a copy marked to the 
MCGM vide letter dated 29.09.2007, mentioning that they intend to 
continue the arbitration proceedings. The Respondent also mentioned 
that the Co-Arbitrators should proceed with the appointment of the 
third arbitrator and inform the parties. No reply was made by the 
MCGM to this letter either, it did not inform the Co-Arbitrators or 
the Respondent that since more than 30 days had elapsed, the 
appointment necessarily had to be made by the Secretary General, 
ICSID and could not be made by the Co-Arbitrators as its case 
now is. Relevant portion of the letter dated 29.09.2007 has been 
reproduced below for reference:
“…
In reference to your above letter, we confirm our intent 
to continue with the arbitration proceedings. We request 
your goodselves to proceed with the appointment of the 
third arbitrator.
We await your subsequent communication confirming the 
appointment of the third arbitrator and commencement 
date for the proceedings.
…”
51.	 On 24.04.2008, the Co-Arbitrators appointed Mr. John Savage as 
the Presiding Arbitrator, who tendered his resignation on 11.08.2008. 

548
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Yet again, even to the appointment of Mr. John Savage, MCGM did 
not raise an objection or point out that the Co-Arbitrators had no 
power to appoint the third arbitrator.
52.	 After Mr. John Savage’s resignation, the letter dated 21.10.2008 
was addressed by the Co-Arbitrators to Mr. Anwarul Haque for 
appointment as the Presiding Arbitrator, who communicated his 
acceptance vide letter dated 29.10.2008. Mr. Justice Jhunjhunwala 
(Retd.) on behalf of the arbitral tribunal, addressed the letter dated 
12.11.2008 to both parties, scheduling the preliminary meeting of 
the Arbitral Tribunal on 08.12.2008, which was further rescheduled 
to 09.12.2008 and then 09.01.2009. Even at that stage, there was 
no objection raised by MCGM to the appointment of the Presiding 
Arbitrator by the Co-Arbitrators.
53.	 The preliminary meeting of the Arbitral Tribunal was conducted on 
09.01.2009. The minutes of the meeting reflect that the meeting 
was attended by representatives of both parties. The MCGM was 
represented through Mr. S.B. Sardar, AE (SO) P & C along with Mr. 
A.B. Mengole, AE (SO) P & C and Mr. R.H. Murya, SE (SO) P & C. 
The minutes of the preliminary meeting do not reflect any objection 
being raised by the MCGM to the constitution of the tribunal.
54.	 When things stood thus, as explained above, the MCGM raised their 
objection for the first time, addressing the letter dated 20.02.2009 
to the Presiding Arbitrator, alleging that his appointment is a ‘nullity’ 
since the Co-Arbitrators had not succeeded in appointing the third 
arbitrator within 30 days and therefore had no power to appoint. 
Relevant portion of the letter dated 20.02.2009 has been reproduced 
below for reference:
“As per facts, the appointed Arbitrators Mr. S.P. Upasani and 
Mr. Justice S. M. Jhunjhunwala (Retd.) have not succeeded 
in appointing within 30 days after their appointment, i.e. 
they have ought to have appointed the third arbitrator on or 
about 07.11.2005. Since they have not appointed the third 
Arbitrator within 30 days, as per law, they have forfeited 
their right to appoint the third Arbitrator within 30 days.
Thus, as per clause 8(b), the third Arbitrator is required to be 
appointed by the Secretary General of International Center 
of Settlement of Investment Disputes Washington D.C.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
549
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
The claimant Mr. R.V. Anderson Associates + PHE 
Consultants had not (illegible) under clause 8.3(b) to the 
Secretary General of International Center for Settlement 
of Investment (illegible) though after Arbitrator Mr. S.P. 
Upasani was appointed on 07.10.2005 and add 30 days 
period is over as 07.10.2005 i.e. as on 07.11.2005.
Thus you have no right to be an Arbitrator under the 
Arbitration Agreement under the Contract.
The MCGM request you to withdraw your self as Arbitrator 
since your appointment is not in consonance with Arbitration 
Agreement under this contract.”
55.	 Application under Section 16 of the 1996 Act was then filed by 
MCGM on 07.07.2009 prior to filing the Statement of Defence. The 
Respondent, in its reply to the letter dated 20.02.2009 as well as the 
application inter alia contended that the MCGM has not approached 
the Secretary General of the ICSID seeking appointment of the third 
arbitrator, and has not raised this objection at the earliest, therefore 
it may not raise this objection at this stage.
56.	 It is clear from the above factual conspectus that the MCGM did 
not raise any objection to the appointment of the third arbitrator by 
the Co-Arbitrators until after the preliminary meeting of the Arbitral 
Tribunal was conducted by Mr. Anwarul Haque, who happened to 
be the third person appointed as the Presiding Arbitrator by the 
Co-Arbitrators. It is nobody’s case that the third arbitrator appointed 
by the parties was ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator under 
Section 12 of the 1996 Act. In fact, it has been recorded in the Section 
16 order that MCGM itself conceded that Section 12 and 13 have 
no applicability to the present case. Its challenge was limited to the 
aspect of improper constitution of tribunal due to non-compliance of 
terms of the arbitration agreement. What needs to be considered, 
therefore, is whether there was undue delay on the part of the MCGM 
in objecting to what it alleges to be non-compliance of the arbitration 
agreement, resulting in waiver of rights.
57.	 In this context, it has been submitted by the learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the MCGM that as per Section 4, waiver may not 
attract in case an objection is made to non-compliance of terms 
of the agreement ‘within the time limit provided’ for raising such 

550
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
objection. He contends that under Section 16(2) a plea that the 
arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction may be raised at any time 
prior to submission of statement of defence, which the MCGM has 
done in the present case. Also, as per the said provision, a party 
shall not be precluded from raising such a plea, merely because he 
has appointed, or participated in the appointment of, an arbitrator.
58.	 The facts of this case do not reveal a situation where the MCGM has, 
under protest, participated in the appointment of the third arbitrator. In 
fact, the third arbitrator was appointed by the Co-Arbitrators appointed 
by the parties. Be that as it may, it cannot be said that the challenge 
to jurisdiction of the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 16 was belated; 
it was rather filed at the appropriate stage, i.e., prior to filing of the 
statement of defence, which is as per the timeline as prescribed in 
Section 16(2) of the 1996 Act.
59.	 A co-ordinate bench of this Court, in the context of ineligibility 
of the arbitrator under Section 12 of the 1996 Act, in Hindustan 
Construction Co. Ltd. v. Bihar Rajya Pul Nirman Nigam Ltd.,3 
discussed the concept of waiver, acquiescence and estoppel under 
the 1996 Act. The relevant portion of the said judgement is quoted 
herein for reference:
“13.1. Waiver is a foundational principle of arbitration, 
rooted in party autonomy and fairness in conduct. 
Arbitration, being adversarial in nature, inevitably results 
in a winning and a losing side. The legislative rationale in 
codifying waiver is to ensure that parties do not secure a 
second bite at the cherry after an unfavourable outcome. 
Parties are not permitted to sleep over their rights. This 
statutory policy is in harmony with the scheme of minimal 
judicial intervention, where the grounds for interference 
with an arbitral award are narrow, and waiver operates 
as a significant bar to belated objections.
13.2. Though waiver, acquiescence, and estoppel are 
often discussed together in arbitral jurisprudence, they 
occupy distinct conceptual spaces. Waiver is the intentional 
relinquishment of a known right; acquiescence arises from 
passive acceptance or delay; and estoppel precludes a 
3	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2578.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
551
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
party from resiling from a representation on which the 
other has relied. The Act, however, incorporates only the 
doctrine of waiver - presuming parties to be conscious 
of their conduct and its consequences. The Act elevates 
silence to waiver by importing an element of intent, thereby 
preventing parties from approbating and reprobating. 
A party who has actively participated or consented to 
continuation of the proceedings cannot later challenge 
the same process merely because the result is adverse. 
The legislative design thus discourages tactical objections 
and multiplicity of proceedings.”
60.	 Additionally, this Court in Quippo Construction Equipment Ltd. v. 
Janardan Nirman (P) Ltd.,4 has relied upon the judgement of this 
Court in Narayan Prasad Lohia v. Nikunj Kumar Lohia,5 where 
the Court held that in case a party is making a challenge to the 
composition of the arbitral tribunal, the challenge must be made 
within the timeline as prescribed under Section 16 of the 1996 Act, 
i.e., prior to filing of the statement of defence, otherwise the waiver 
under Section 4 shall attract. Relevant portion of the judgement in 
Narayan Prasad Lohia (Supra) is quoted herein for reference:
“16. It has been held by a Constitution Bench of this Court, 
in the case of Konkan Rly. Corpn. Ltd. v. Rani Construction 
(P) Ltd. [(2002) 2 SCC 388] that Section 16 enables the 
Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own jurisdiction. It has been 
held that under Section 16 the Arbitral Tribunal can rule on 
any objection with respect to existence or validity of the 
arbitration agreement. It is held that the Arbitral Tribunal’s 
authority under Section 16, is not confined to the width of 
its jurisdiction but goes also to the root of its jurisdiction. 
Not only this decision is binding on this Court, but we are 
in respectful agreement with the same. Thus it is no longer 
open to contend that, under Section 16, a party cannot 
challenge the composition of the Arbitral Tribunal before 
the Arbitral Tribunal itself. Such a challenge must be taken, 
under Section 16(2), not later than the submission of the 
4	
(2020) 18 SCC 277
5	
(2002) 3 SCC 572.

552
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
statement of defence. Section 16(2) makes it clear that 
such a challenge can be taken even though the party may 
have participated in the appointment of the arbitrator and/
or may have himself appointed the arbitrator. Needless to 
state a party would be free, if it so chooses, not to raise 
such a challenge. Thus a conjoint reading of Sections 
10 and 16 shows that an objection to the composition of 
the Arbitral Tribunal is a matter which is derogable. It is 
derogable because a party is free not to object within the 
time prescribed in Section 16(2). If a party chooses not to 
so object there will be a deemed waiver under Section 4. 
Thus, we are unable to accept the submission that Section 
10 is a non-derogable provision. In our view Section 10 
has to be read along with Section 16 and is, therefore, a 
derogable provision.”
61.	 From the above judgements, it is clear that statutory waiver under 
Section 4 of the 1996 Act would attract in case an objection under 
Section 16 challenging the composition of tribunal and lack of 
jurisdiction is not filed prior to the time-limit as prescribed under 
Section 16(2). In the present case, the application under Section 
16 has been filed within the said time-limit. Therefore, it cannot be 
said that the MCGM is completely precluded from raising a challenge 
of this nature. As such, statutory waiver under Section 4 does not 
attract in the present case since a timely challenge to the jurisdiction 
of the Arbitral Tribunal has been made by the MCGM.
62.	 However, upon making such a challenge by a party, while adjudicating 
the application under Section 16 on merits by the Arbitral Tribunal, 
or examining its rejection at the stage of Section 34 followed by 
Section 37, the prior conduct of the party certainly becomes a relevant 
consideration to decipher its understanding of the contractual scheme. 
This is especially so, when the jurisdictional challenge due to improper 
composition of the Arbitral Tribunal is made on the ground of non-
compliance of the arbitration clause. In such a case, the conduct of 
the party right from the stage of invocation of arbitration becomes a 
relevant consideration. While examining the alleged departure from 
the contractual scheme, acquiescence by the party in its conduct, its 
actions pursuant to the contractual terms and how it has understood 
and acted as per the terms of the contract, are all crucial aid in 
comprehending the contractual scheme. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
553
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
63.	 In the facts of this case, beyond 30 days from the date of appointment 
of the second Arbitrator, i.e. 07.10.2005, the MCGM agreed to 
attempt mediation / conciliation by its letter dated 07.01.2006 and 
then informed the Co-Arbitrators about there being no mediation / 
conciliation by its letter dated 15.12.2006. MCGM passively sat idle 
while three different persons were appointed as the Presiding Arbitrator 
under Clause 8.3(b) of the Agreement by the Co-Arbitrators, without 
any demur. Even when the Co-Arbitrators in their communication 
marked to parties discussed about appointing the third arbitrator 
and the Respondent requested them to appoint the third arbitrator, 
there was no objection or demur from MCGM about the alleged non-
compliance of the terms of the arbitration agreement. The MCGM, 
until they raised their objection after the first preliminary meeting of 
the Arbitral Tribunal, had never come up with a plea that after expiry 
of thirty days from the date of appointment of Mr. Upasani, the Co-
Arbitrators had become forum non conveniens and therefore they 
had absolutely no power to appoint the third arbitrator. Even though 
we have found above that the interpretation by the Tribunal and High 
Court that the appointment of the third arbitrator by Secretary General, 
ICSID was not a requirement under the arbitration agreement, but 
rather an enabling clause triggered upon a request being made 
by either party before the ICSID, we find that if the conduct of the 
Appellant is examined, it is clear that the Appellant never interpreted 
the contract in the manner which they are suggesting now.
64.	 We have reached this conclusion in the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of this case, where it is apparent that merely filing the 
application under Section 16 could not regularize the conduct of the 
Respondent and its acquiescence to the power of appointment of the 
third arbitrator being exercised by the Co-Arbitrators not only once, 
but thrice. We are constrained to reach this conclusion, primarily 
because, Justice Dhanuka (Retd.) was appointed as the Presiding 
Arbitrator by the Co-Arbitrators on 30.04.2007; even if MCGM’s 
argument that the Co-Arbitrators had become forum non conveniens, 
is assumed to be corrected, this was the first time an objection to 
non-compliance of terms of the arbitration agreement should have 
been raised. Yet, it was only after the subsequent appointment of 
Mr. John Savage, his resignation and the later appointment of Mr. 
Anwarul Haque and the preliminary meeting of the Tribunal in the 
year 2009 that the objection to composition of the Arbitral Tribunal 
was made for the first time.

554
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
65.	 Neither party has approached the ICSID and triggered the enabling 
clause by fulfilling the condition precedent of making a request for 
appointment. Although there was extensive communication between 
the parties and the Co-Arbitrators, the MCGM did not point out from 
the very beginning that the Respondent must approach the ICSID. 
In such circumstances, the Appellant cannot now turn around and 
say, that was the only method for appointment.
66.	 In the present case, the MCGM was completely aware about the 
non-compliance of a contractual requirement under the arbitration 
agreement which it alleges. It proceeded with the arbitration process 
without any demur, agreed to keep the arbitration proceedings in 
abeyance to pursue other methods of dispute resolution (mediation / 
conciliation), and did not object to such non-compliance on three 
different occasions when such alleged non-compliance took place. 
In such a case, filing of an application under Section 16 of the 1996 
Act cannot regularize or condone its conduct and such conduct is a 
relevant consideration to decipher its understanding of the contractual 
terms while deciding the Section 16 application on merits by the 
Tribunal even in the absence of statutory waiver under Section 4 
being attracted.
67.	 We say so because the subsequent conduct of the parties serves 
as a powerful practical tool to understand their contractual intent. 
Reliance on a party’s original understanding of obligations under 
a contract as well as their actions prevents a party from later on 
adopting a legalistic interpretation which supports their case in 
stark contradiction of how they actually operated on the ground. In 
the present case, even though the MCGM argues with vehemence 
that the Co-Arbitrators had no power to appoint the third arbitrator, 
the admitted case is that neither party triggered the contingency by 
approaching the ICSID. Additionally, the MCGM was put to notice 
by the Co-Arbitrators and the Respondent about the appointment of 
the third arbitrator, not only once, but on three different occasions. 
In response to communication where the Respondent has requested 
the Co-Arbitrators to appoint the third arbitrator, the MCGM has not 
taken a view that the Secretary General, ICSID is the only authority 
who could appoint the third arbitrator. The MCGM seems to have 
conveniently turned a blind eye to the communication which was 
marked to it and then at the stage prior to filing of the statement of 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
555
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai v.  
M/s R.V. Anderson Associates Limited
defence, for the first time, raised this issue which relates to alleged 
non-compliance of terms of the agreement in respect of appointment 
of arbitrators. In such a fact situation, no party can be permitted to 
take the dispute resolution process, the nominee arbitrators or the 
opposite party for a ride. A party cannot keep a ‘jurisdictional ace’ up 
their sleeve and then claim that filing of the jurisdictional challenge 
under Section 16 would go back in time and wipe out the past 
conduct and acquiescence of the party which would clearly evince 
how the contractual terms were viewed by the parties. If the same 
is permitted, it will erode the basic principles of alternative dispute 
resolution and ethos of arbitration.
68.	 In view of the above findings, the learned Single Judge in the Section 
34 application and the Division Bench in the Section 37 appeal were 
completely justified to reject interference and refuse to set aside the 
arbitral award. In light of the evidence which goes to show the manner 
in which the contract was understood and acted upon by the parties, 
the view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal is certainly a plausible view 
and no reasonable ground is made out for setting aside the arbitral 
award under Section 34 of the 1996 Act. As such, we do not find 
any merit in these appeals, they are accordingly dismissed. In the 
facts, there shall be no order as to cost. All pending applications 
shall be treated as disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals Dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
