[2026] 3 S.C.R. 448 : 2026 INSC 225
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
v.
Rajkumar Yadav
(Civil Appeal No. 3279 of 2026)
11 March 2026
[Ahsanuddin Amanullah and N.V. Anjaria,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Challenge to the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court 
setting aside the order of the Single Judge by way of which the 
Single Judge had dismissed the writ petition of respondent wherein 
he had challenged the rejection of his candidature by the screening 
committee for appointment to the post of constable (driver) in the 
police force on the ground that he had criminal antecedents.
Headnotes†
Service Law – Recruitment in Police Force – M.P. Police 
Regulations – Rejection of candidature by screening committee 
for appointment to the post of constable (driver) in the police 
force on the ground of criminal antecedents, when justified – 
Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition of 
the respondent challenging the rejection of his candidature 
by the screening committee for appointment to the post of 
constable (driver) in the police force on the ground that he had 
criminal antecedents – Single Judge held that the acquittal of 
the respondent in the criminal case was not a clean acquittal, 
but was founded on the ground of benefit of doubt – Order 
set aside by Division Bench holding that the acquittal was 
honourable and directing the competent authority to reconsider 
the case of the respondent – Interference with:
Held: Impugned judgment set aside – Respondent was charged 
in respect of the offences u/ss.363, 366, 366/120B, 366A, 
376(2)(c), IPC which were the offences in the nature of grave 
moral turpitude – Respondent was found to be involved in the 
serious offences such as kidnapping and abducting a minor girl 
and raping her, which was a conduct undoubtedly amounting to 
moral turpitude – The respondent, though acquitted in the criminal 
* Author

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
449
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Rajkumar Yadav
case, was exonerated only on the ground of benefit of doubt – 
Division Bench of the High Court intruded into the functional realm 
of the screening committee and trampled upon its discretion which 
was validly exercised by the Committee to treat the respondent 
unsuitable to be employed in the police force – The domain of 
considering the fitness and suitability of a candidate for the purpose 
of taking him in service belongs to the employer – But for the 
limited considerations namely arbitrariness, unreasonableness, 
whimsicalness or mala fide approach, the scope of judicial review 
on this score is extremely limited – Moreover, the quality of 
law and order in the society and maintenance thereof depends 
upon the character of the persons serving in the police force – It 
becomes imperative that the recruitees in the disciplined force 
should be the persons beyond reproach and men with rectitude. 
[Paras 9, 9.1, 10]
Service Law – Suitability of candidate, wisdom of the 
employer – Scope of judicial review, extremely limited:
Held: The domain of considering the fitness and suitability of a 
candidate for the purpose of taking him in service belongs to the 
employer – A host of relevant consideration would legitimately find 
a place in the process of such consideration by the employer to 
decide whether it is feasible and advisable to offer employment to 
an aspirant – Where the employer or the screening committee of 
the employer has acted to discard, exclude or reject the candidature 
by applying relevant considerations and has not acted arbitrarily 
or whimsically, the courts have no role to interpose – But for the 
limited considerations namely arbitrariness, unreasonableness, 
whimsicalness or mala fide approach, the scope of judicial review 
on this score is extremely limited – Courts are not expected to 
override the wisdom of the employer in judging the suitability of a 
candidate and in considering the relevance of the antecedents of 
the candidate and would not substitute its own view. [Paras 7.3, 9]
Service Law – Antecedents of a candidate – Role in the decision-
making process by the employer – Scope of discretion: 
Held: In service law jurisprudence, mere involvement of a person 
in an offence or in a conduct amounting to moral turpitude without 
anything else may become relevant consideration to judge his 
fitness to the post and to assess credentials for allowing such a 
person into the employment – Every moral turpitude has its own 

450
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
counts and degree to become either abhorrent and unacceptable 
conduct, and would also amount to commission of offence under the 
law – In a given case, moral turpitude may not result into a legally 
proved guilt, and it may go unpunished for variety of reasons – 
Still however, it remains a conduct against decency, morality and 
norms practiced in the civil society inviting a serious discount and 
disability for such person in a given situation and given context – 
Whether it is a question of recruiting a person into the service or 
continuing him in service or extending an employee some service 
benefit, his criminal antecedents, involvement in criminal activity, 
the conduct amounting to moral turpitude, registration of a criminal 
case as well as nature of his acquittal in a criminal case are all 
germane considerations to be applied – The employer who would 
be acting through a screening committee to sift such cases, has 
fairly a large realm of freedom to act, though without becoming 
arbitrary  – The area of discretion vested with the screening 
committee in this regard is wide enough to permit it to exclude a 
candidate or reject him for the purpose of giving appointment – 
In a given case where the facts are stark, mere involvement of a 
person in an alleged offence or in the act of moral turpitude may 
become sufficient enough to apply it as debilitating factor for such 
candidate to be offered employment – Antecedents of a candidate 
play an important role in the decision-making process by the 
screening committee – This dictum would operate with greater 
rigour when it comes to the recruitment and appointment to the 
disciplined force like police. [Paras 6-7.1]
Honourable Acquittal – What is:
Held: An honourable acquittal may be one where court comes 
to a definitive conclusion at the end of the trial upon full-fledged 
appreciation of evidence that the accused had not committed an 
offence for which he was charged – This is in sharp contrast against 
arriving at a finding that because of some lacuna in the prosecution 
case or in the leading the evidence or on account of non-availability 
of credible evidence, the offender is not convicted by giving him 
the benefit of doubt – In such eventualities, the yardstick known 
to the criminal jurisprudence is applied namely that the offence 
has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt – Distinction between 
an honourable acquittal and the acquittal other than honourable, 
discussed – The acquittal founded on benefit of doubt is an acquittal 
based on technical ground – Giving benefit of doubt and thus 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
451
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Rajkumar Yadav
not convicting the offender is a technical consideration applied – 
The acquittal for the respondent was governed by such criteria. 
[Para 5.2.1-5.2.3]
Service Law – Acquittal in criminal case is not always 
conclusive of the suitability of a candidate:
Held: Even the departmental enquiry can proceed independent 
of the acquittal in criminal case and mere exoneration in criminal 
case would not entitle an employee to be reinstated as a necessary 
sequitur to the acquittal. [Para 5.7]
Case Law Cited
Commissioner of Police, New Delhi & Anr. v. Mehar Singh [2013] 
13 SCR 432 : (2013) 7 SCC 685; Avtar Singh v. Union of India 
& Ors. [2016] 7 SCR 445 : (2016) 8 SCC 471; Union Territory, 
Chandigarh Administration & Ors. v. Pradeep Kumar & Anr. [2018] 
1 SCR 112 : (2018) 1 SCC 797; Management of Reserve Bank 
of India, New Delhi v. Bhopal Singh Panchal [1993] Supp. 3 SCR 
586  : (1994) 1 SCC 541; State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. 
Parvez Khan [2014] 14 SCR 520 : (2015) 2 SCC 591 – relied on.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Acquittal founded on benefit of doubt; Acquittal on technical ground; 
Exoneration only on the ground of benefit of doubt; Not a clean 
and honourable acquittal; Post of constable (driver); Rejection of 
candidature by screening committee; Appointment to the post of 
constable (driver) in the police force; Criminal antecedents; Ineligible 
for police service; Appointment of police constables; Offences in 
the nature of grave moral turpitude; Serious offences; Kidnapping 
and abducting a minor girl; Raping a minor girl; Conduct amounting 
to moral turpitude; “honourably acquitted”; “honourable acquittal”, 
“acquittal of blame”, “fully acquitted”; Verification of character and 
antecedents; Suitability of a candidate; Screening committee; 
Discretion of Screening committee; Discretion of employer; Police 
service; M.P. Police Regulations; Acquittal in criminal case not 
always conclusive of the suitability of a candidate; Offences in the 
nature of grave moral turpitude.

452
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
3279 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.07.2023 of the High Court 
of Madhya Pradesh at Indore in WA No. 297 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Sarthak Raizada G.A., Sarad Kumar Singhania, Anil Hooda, Ms. 
Mrigna Shekhar.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Santosh Kumar, Sr. Adv., Rajiv R. Mishra, Suruchi Yadav, Ashutosh 
Yadav.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
N.V. Anjaria, J.
Leave granted. 
1.1.	 The appellants are permitted to place on record the additional 
documents, as prayed for.
2.	
More often than not, the quality of law and order in the society and 
maintenance thereof depends upon the character of the persons 
serving in the police force. It becomes imperative that the recruitees 
in the disciplined force should be the persons beyond reproach and 
men with rectitude.
2.1.	 The exposition of the above narrative is required to be applied in 
its four corners while examining the challenge to judgment and 
order dated 20.07.2023 passed by the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh in Writ Appeal No. 297 of 2023, which is impugned 
in the present appeal preferred by the appellant–the State of 
Madhya Pradesh.
2.2.	 Learned Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ 
petition of respondent-original petitioner (hereinafter referred to 
as ‘the respondent’ as per the present position) by judgment and 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
453
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Rajkumar Yadav
order dated 09.02.2023 in which the respondent had challenged 
the rejection of his candidature by the screening committee for 
appointment to the post of constable (driver) in the police force 
on the ground that the petitioner had criminal antecedents. 
2.3.	 The Division Bench of the High Court set aside the judgment 
and order of learned Single Judge, consequently set at naught 
order-cum-decision dated 16.06.2017, whereby the screening 
committee treated the respondent to be not fit for giving 
employment as constable. It further directed the competent 
authority of the appellants to reconsider the case of the 
respondent, for appointment to the post of constable (driver) by 
treating the acquittal dated 26.09.2014 granted to the respondent 
to be a clean and honourable acquittal and to pass appropriate 
order within stipulated time.
2.4.	 The operative part of the impugned judgment and order of the 
High Cout in Paragraph 11 is reproduced herein,
‘(i) Impugned order dated 09.02.2023, passed in WP 
No 4212/2017 is set aside.
(ii) Impugned order dated 16.6.2017(Annexure-P/1 to 
the petition), passed by the respondents is quashed 
for having been passed without application of mind.
(iii) The respondents/competent authority is directed to 
reconsider the case of the appellant for appointment 
to the post of constable (driver) in Police Force afresh 
by treating the acquittal dated 26.09.2014 to be clean 
and honourable and pass an appropriate speaking 
order in accordance with law.
(iv) The aforesaid exercise be completed within a 
period of 60 days from the date of receipt of certified 
copy of this order.’
3.	
In the writ petition before the High Court, the respondent herein 
prayed to set aside the order-cum-decision dated 16.07.2017 of 
the competent authority of the screening committee. The screening 
committee had undertaken the character verification of the respondent 
and after examination, treated the respondent to be ineligible for the 
police service. The respondent had applied for the post of constable 
(driver) in the process of appointment of the police constables in 

454
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
different categories initiated in the year 2016. He was qualified to 
stand at serial No. 336 in the unreserved category. Before joining, the 
respondent submitted an affidavit disclosing the factum of criminal 
case against him, and enclosed copy of the order of the acquittal.
3.1.	 In the year 2012, First Information Report bearing Crime No. 33 
of 2012 was registered against the respondent and four other 
accused persons in respect of the offences under Sections 363, 
366, 366-A, 376(2)(f) and Section 120B of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860, at Begumganj Police Station, Raisen district. The 
chargesheet came to be filed against the respondent and the 
trial took place. The trial court by judgment and order dated 
26.09.2014 acquitted the respondent herein and two other 
accused persons giving them benefit of doubt.
3.2.	 In course of the recruitment process, the screening committee 
of the appellant herein undertook the process of character 
verification. The respondent was found to be not fit for the post 
in question on the ground of the said criminal case against 
him. In the writ petition, the respondent-petitioner contended 
inter alia that he was already acquitted and that he had also 
disclosed the registration of the criminal case against him. 
It was submitted that in the M.P. Police Manual, there was 
no provision which created any bar on the appointment of 
candidate against whom a criminal case has been registered. 
It was further submitted that the respondent was selected for 
the post of constable (driver) and not for discharging general 
duty as constable, which aspect could not have been ignored 
by the employing authorities.
3.3.	 The stand of the respondent in the writ petition was that though 
the petitioner was acquitted in the criminal case by the trial court, 
it was an acquittal by giving benefit of doubt. It was pointed 
out that the respondent was tried for the serious offences in 
the nature of moral turpitude and was acquitted on technical 
ground, therefore, he was not liable to be considered for the 
post of police constable and therefore was not allowed to join 
duty. It was stated that in view of the provision in paragraph 
53(C) of the M.P. Police Regulations, the respondent was not 
fit for the post of police constable inasmuch as his acquittal 
was on technical ground.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
455
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Rajkumar Yadav
3.4.	 While dismissing the writ petition and negativing the prayer of 
the respondent, learned single judge took note of paragraph 
53(C) of the M.P. Police Regulations. He further took the 
view that the acquittal of the respondent in the criminal case 
was not a clean acquittal, but was founded on the ground of 
benefit of doubt, and when there was no clean acquittal, the 
respondent was rightly refused induction into the service in the 
police department. According to the Division Bench, however, 
the acquittal was honourable as per paragraph 90 and 92 of 
the judgment and that it was incorrect to project the acquittal 
not to be the clean acquittal.
4.	
Heard learned Advocate Mr. Sarthak Raizada with learned advocate-
on-record, Mr. Sarad Kumar Singhania for the appellant-State along 
with other assisting advocates, learned senior advocate Mr. Santosh 
Kumar with learned advocate Mr. Rajiv R. Mishra and other assisting 
advocates, at length. Both the learned advocates made this Court 
travel through the record of the case including the judgment of the 
trial court which acquitted the respondent.
5.	
In the impugned judgment and order, the Division Bench of the 
High Court has taken the view that in light of what is observed in 
paragraph 90 and 92 of the judgment of the trial court, the respondent 
was honourably acquitted. While it may be true that the trial court 
discussed the evidence before recording the acquittal, there is no 
gainsaying that what the court held was that the charges against 
the four accused including the respondent herein were not proved 
beyond reasonable doubt.
5.1.	 The relevant part of paragraph 90, is extracted herein,
‘Involvement of the remaining accused except 
accused Dhaniram in the crime and the criminal 
conspiracy hatched by them is doubtful. Therefore, 
the other four accused are entitled to get the benefit 
of doubt. The charge against them is not proved 
beyond reasonable doubt.’
5.1.1.	 In the same way, the following was recorded in 
paragraph 92, 
‘The court concludes that the charges 
against the remaining accused Delan, Vishal, 

456
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Rajkumar and Mahesh are not proved beyond 
reasonable doubt for criminal conspiracy 
and kidnapping of minor girl from lawful 
guardianship, kidnapping of minor girl for illicit 
sexual intercourse and criminal conspiracy for 
rape under Section 363 alternative, Section 
363/120B, Section 366 alternative, Section 
366/120-B, Section 366-A and Section 376 
(2) (c) / 120-B IPC. The above four accused 
are entitled to be acquitted of all the above 
charges.’
5.2.	 The concept of “honourably acquitted”, often becomes hazy. 
This court on several occasions observed that the expressions 
“honourable acquittal”, “acquittal of blame”, “fully acquitted” 
are unknown to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or the 
Penal Code, 1860. These phrases are coined in the judicial 
pronouncements. 
5.2.1.	 An honourable acquittal may be one where court comes 
to a definitive conclusion at the end of the trial upon 
full-fledged appreciation of evidence that the accused 
had not committed an offence for which he was charged. 
This would stand in sharp contrast against arriving at a 
finding that because of some lacuna in the prosecution 
case or in the leading the evidence or on account of 
non-availability of credible evidence, the offender is 
not convicted by giving him the benefit of doubt. In 
such eventualities, the yardstick known to the criminal 
jurisprudence is applied namely that the offence has to 
be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
5.2.2.	 A simple example would explain the nicety of the 
distinction between an honourable acquittal and the 
acquittal other than honourable. In a given case, say 
a person is charged for committing misappropriation 
of money. After trying the accused for the offence, if 
the court comes to a clear conclusion that the person 
has not committed misappropriation and has not 
defalcated money, it amounts to a clean chit in respect 
to the offence. It is suggestive of the factum that the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
457
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Rajkumar Yadav
misappropriation was not done.	 However, if the court 
holds that charge of misappropriation is not proved on 
the account of weak prosecution case or weak evidence 
and therefore it is not possible to conclusively record 
finding about the commission of offence, the acquittal 
which may follow in such circumstances cannot be said 
to be an honourable acquittal. 
5.2.3.	 The acquittal founded on benefit of doubt is an acquittal 
based on technical ground. Giving benefit of doubt 
and thus not convicting the offender is a technical 
consideration applied. The acquittal for the respondent 
was governed by such criteria.
5.3.	 In Commissioner of Police, New Delhi & Anr. Vs. Mehar 
Singh 1, this court had on occasion to consider the question 
whether the candidature of the respondents who had revealed 
of their involvement in a criminal case by mentioning such fact 
in their application/attestation form while applying for a post of 
constable in Delhi Police, who were provisionally selected subject 
to verification of their antecedents and who were subsequently 
acquitted/discharged in the criminal case, could be cancelled 
by the screening committee of the Delhi Police on the ground 
that they were not found suitable for appointment to the post 
of constable.
5.3.1.	 This Court observed that the screening committee was 
within its right to cancel the candidature of a candidate 
even if the candidate was acquitted of the criminal 
charges, by taking into account the nature of acquittal. 
It was observed that persons involved in grave cases 
of moral turpitude could be properly kept out of police 
force even if they are acquitted or discharged. 
5.3.2.	 Stated this Court thus,
‘It is only experienced officers of the screening 
committee who will be able to judge whether 
the acquitted or discharged candidate is likely 
to revert to similar activities in future with more 
1	
(2013) 7 SCC 685

458
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
strength and vigour, if appointed, to the post 
in a police force. The screening committee 
will have to consider the nature and extent 
of such person’s involvement in the crime 
and his propensity of becoming a cause for 
worsening the law and order situation rather 
than maintaining it. In our opinion, this policy 
framed by the Delhi Police does not merit 
any interference from this Court as its object 
appears to be to ensure that only persons with 
impeccable character enter the police force.’
(Para 23)
5.3.3.	 It was emphasised that satisfactory character antecedent 
has to be insisted for, when a person wishes to join the 
disciplined force,
‘The police force is a disciplined force. 
It shoulders the great responsibility of 
maintaining law and order and public order 
in the society. People repose great faith 
and confidence in it. It must be worthy of 
that confidence. A candidate wishing to join 
the police force must be a person of utmost 
rectitude. He must have impeccable character 
and integrity. A person having criminal 
antecedents will not fit in this category.’
(Para 35)
5.4.	 The purpose and utility of verification of a character and 
antecedents to judge the suitability of a person to the post need 
not be overemphasized. In Avtar Singh Vs. Union of India	
& Ors.2. It was observed that it is one of the important criteria 
which is necessary to be fulfilled before appointment is made 
and that an incumbent should not have antecedents of such a 
nature which may adjudge him unsuitable for the post. 
2	
(2016) 8 SCC 471

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
459
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Rajkumar Yadav
5.4.1.	 It was stated,
‘The verification of antecedents is necessary 
to find out fitness of incumbent, in the process 
if a declarant is found to be of good moral 
character on due verification of antecedents, 
merely by suppression of involvement in trivial 
offence which was not pending on date of 
filling attestation form, whether he may be 
deprived of employment? There may be case 
of involving moral turpitude/serious offence in 
which employee has been acquitted but due 
to technical reasons or giving benefit of doubt.’
(Para 29)
5.5.	 In Union Territory, Chandigarh Administration & Ors. Vs. 
Pradeep Kumar & Anr.3, the respondents were declared 
successful in the recruitment for the post of constable in 
Chandigarh Police after clearing the physical efficiency test, 
physical measurement test, written test and interview. The 
respondents were prosecuted in criminal trial for the offences 
under Sections 323, 506 read with Section 34, Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 and were acquitted by the trial court. When the 
matter was referred to the screening committee as per the 
recruitment guidelines, the screening committee found that the 
respondents were not suitable for appointment as constables. 
5.5.1.	 The Tribunal set aside the order of the screening 
committee and directed the authorities to consider the 
case of the respondents for appointment to the said post. 
The High Court refused to interfere with the order of the 
tribunal. This Court however did not approve the view 
taken by the tribunal and the High Court and restored 
the order of the screening committee. 
5.5.2.	 The following principles came to enunciated by this court, 
(a)	 The acquittal in a criminal case is not conclusive 
of the suitability of the candidates in respect of 
3	
(2018) 1 SCC 797

460
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the post concerned. Even if a person is acquitted 
or discharged, it cannot always been inferred that 
he was falsely involved or he had no criminal 
antecedents.
(Para 10)
(b)	 Acquittal in a criminal case does not automatically 
entitle a candidate for appointment to the post. 
Still, it is open to the employer to consider the 
antecedents and examine whether the person is 
suitable for appointment to the post.
(Para 13)
(c)	
In a case where the employee has made declaration 
truthfully of a concluded criminal case, the employer 
still has the right to consider antecedents and 
cannot be compelled to appoint the candidate. 
(Para 12)
5.5.3.	 It was reiterated that police service requires candidate 
with good character, integrity and clean antecedents,
‘Police service requires candidates of good 
character, integrity and clean antecedents. 
The police force is a disciplined force. 
It shoulders the great responsibility of 
maintaining law and order and public order 
in the society. People repose great faith 
and confidence in it. It must be worthy of 
that confidence. A person having criminal 
antecedents will not fit in this category. Even 
if he is acquitted or discharged in the criminal 
case, that acquittal or discharge order will 
have to be examined to see whether he has 
been completely exonerated in the case 
because even a possibility of his taking to the 
life of crimes poses a threat to the discipline 
of the police force.’ 
(Para 11, 13)

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
461
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Rajkumar Yadav
5.6.	 In Union Territory, Chandigarh administration (supra), this 
Court underlined that acquittal in criminal case is not always 
conclusive of the suitability of a candidate,
‘The acquittal in a criminal case is not conclusive of 
the suitability of the candidates in the post concerned. 
If a person is acquitted or discharged, it cannot always 
be inferred that he was falsely involved, or he had 
no criminal antecedents.’ 
(Para 10)
5.7.	 The law is also well settled that even the departmental enquiry 
can proceed independent of the acquittal in criminal case 
and that mere exoneration in criminal case would not entitle 
an employee to be reinstated as a necessary sequitur to the 
acquittal. In Management of Reserve Bank of India, New 
Delhi Vs. Bhopal Singh Panchal4, this Court held that when the 
High Court acquitted the respondent employee by giving benefit 
of doubt, the bank rightly refused to reinstate him in service 
on the ground that it was not an honourable acquittal. Further, 
the criminal antecedents of an employee and the nature of his 
acquittal is considered germane to be applied by the employer 
even while determining the entitlement of pay and allowance 
for the period concerned to the employee or for treating the 
period of suspension on duty.
6.	
As is already stated, in the present case, the respondent was charged 
in respect of the offences under Sections 363, 366, 366/120B, 366A, 
376(2)(c) which were the offences in the nature of grave moral 
turpitude. Every moral turpitude has its own counts and degree to 
become either abhorrent and unacceptable conduct, and would also 
amount to commission of offence under the law. In a given case, 
moral turpitude may not result into a legally proved guilt, and it may 
go unpunished for variety of reasons. Still however, it remains a 
conduct against decency, morality and norms practiced in the civil 
society inviting a serious discount and disability for such person in 
a given situation and given context. 
4	
(1994) 1 SCC 541

462
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
6.1.	 In service law jurisprudence, mere involvement of a person in 
an offence or in a conduct amounting to moral turpitude without 
anything else may become relevant consideration to judge his 
fitness to the post and to assess credentials for allowing such 
a person into the employment.
7.	
The necessary conclusion from the parameters and principles 
summarised above, is that whether it is a question of recruiting a 
person into the service or continuing him in service or extending an 
employee some service benefit, his criminal antecedents, involvement 
in criminal activity, the conduct amounting to moral turpitude, 
registration of a criminal case as well as nature of his acquittal in 
a criminal case are all germane considerations to be applied. The 
employer who would be acting through a screening committee to 
sift such cases, has fairly a large realm of freedom to act, though 
without becoming arbitrary. 
7.1.	 The area of discretion vested with the screening committee in 
this regard is wide enough to permit it to exclude a candidate 
or reject him for the purpose of giving appointment. In a given 
case where the facts are stark, mere involvement of a person 
in an alleged offence or in the act of moral turpitude may 
become sufficient enough to apply it as debilitating factor for 
such candidate to be offered employment. Antecedents of a 
candidate play an important role in the decision-making process 
by the screening committee. This dictum would operate with 
greater rigour when it comes to the recruitment and appointment 
to the disciplined force like police.
7.2.	 The position of law was highlighted again in the following 
observations by this Court in State of Madhya Pradesh & 
Ors. Vs. Parvez Khan5, 
‘…it is clear that a candidate to be recruited to the 
police service must be worthy of confidence and 
must be a person of utmost rectitude and must have 
impeccable character and integrity. A person having 
criminal antecedents will not fit in this category. Even 
if he is acquitted or discharged, it cannot be presumed 
that he was completely exonerated. Persons who are 
5	
(2015) 2 SCC 591

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
463
The State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v. Rajkumar Yadav
likely to erode the credibility of the police ought not 
to enter the police force.’
(Para 13)
7.2.1.	 It was further stated,
‘No doubt the screening committee has not 
been constituted in the case considered 
by this Court, as rightly pointed out by the 
learned counsel for the respondent, in the 
present case, the Superintendent of Police 
has gone into the matter. The Superintendent 
of Police is the appointing authority. There is 
no allegation of mala fides against the person 
taking the said decision nor the decision is 
shown to be perverse or irrational.’ 
(Para 13)
7.3.	 The domain of considering the fitness and suitability of a candidate 
for the purpose of taking him in service belongs to the employer. 
A host of relevant consideration would legitimately find a place 
in the process of such consideration by the employer to decide 
whether it is feasible and advisable to offer employment to an 
aspirant. Where the employer or the screening committee of the 
employer has acted to discard, exclude or reject the candidature 
by applying relevant considerations and has not acted arbitrarily 
or whimsically, the courts have no role to interpose. Of course, 
a demonstrably mala fide approach by the employer would give 
room to the courts to exercise the power of judicial review. 
8.	
In Mehar Singh (supra) and in Parvez Khan (supra), this court 
opined that the decision of the screening committee must be taken as 
final unless as it is shown to be mala fide. The screening committee 
also must be alive to the importance of the trust reposed in it and 
must examine the candidate with utmost care for the candidate’s 
character.
9.	
But for the above limited considerations namely arbitrariness, 
unreasonableness, whimsicalness or mala fide approach, the scope 
of judicial review on this score is extremely limited. The courts are 
not expected to override the wisdom of the employer in judging the 

464
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
suitability of a candidate and in considering the relevance of the 
antecedents of the candidate and would not substitute its own view. 
9.1.	 Reverting back to the facts of the instant case, the screening 
committee of the appellant rejected the candidature of the 
respondent for the post of constable (driver) in police force 
as per the decision dated 16.06.2017. What weighed with the 
screening committee was that the respondent was found to 
be involved in the serious offences such as kidnapping and 
abducting a minor girl and raping her, which was a conduct 
undoubtedly amounting to moral turpitude. The respondent, 
though acquitted in the criminal case, was exonerated only on 
the ground of benefit of doubt.
9.2.	 Learned Single Judge was justified in dismissing the petition 
upholding the decision of the screening committee. The judgment 
and order of learned Single Judge of the High Court, which was 
eminently just and legal, came to be reversed by the Division 
Bench of the High Court for not good reason, directing that the 
acquittal ought to have been treated as an honourable acquittal 
and required the appellant-employer to consider the respondent 
for appointment to the post. The Division Bench of the High 
Court thereby intruded into the functional realm of the screening 
committee and trampled upon its discretion which was validly 
exercised by the Committee to treat the respondent unsuitable 
to be employed in the police force. 
10.	 For the foregoing discussion and reason, the impugned judgment and 
order dated 20.07.2023 passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court allowing Writ Appeal No. 297 of 2023 cannot be sustained in 
eye of law. The same is set aside. 
11.	 The appeal stands allowed.
All Interlocutory Applications, as may be pending, will not survive in 
view of the disposal of the main appeal. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
