[2026] 3 S.C.R. 358 : 2026 INSC 234
Manohar Lal
v.
Commissioner of Police & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 13860 of 2024)
12 March 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari* and Atul S. Chandurkar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to dismissal of police constable without conducting 
departmental inquiry, holding that it was not reasonably practicable 
to hold an inquiry.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.311(2) second proviso clause (b) – 
Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed 
in civil capacities under the Union or a State – Exercise of the 
power u/Art.311 – Registration of FIR against the appellant-
constable posted in the Special Cell for the offence of robbery 
and thereafter arrested and taken in custody – While he was 
in custody the order of dismissal passed in exercise of the 
power u/Art.311(2) second proviso clause (b) holding that it 
would not be ‘reasonably practicable’ to conduct a regular 
departmental enquiry on account of reasonable belief of threat, 
intimidation and inducement to the victim and thereby creating 
the possibility of tampering of the vital evidence – Appellant 
filed application seeking quashment of his dismissal order, 
however rejected by the tribunal – Writ petition thereagainst 
also dismissed by the High Court – Correctness:
Held: It is vivid from the analysis of the intent of Art.311(2) that 
an employee holding a post in Union or State ought not to be 
dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to the one by 
which he was appointed – Person shall be dismissed or removed or 
reduced in rank after an inquiry supplying the charges if any against 
him and giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect 
of those charges – Applicability of the said clause is restricted in 
a situation wherein his conduct led to his conviction of criminal 
* Author

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
359
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
charges or where the authority empowered who dismissed, removed 
or reduced in rank records reason in writing upon satisfaction that 
it is not ‘reasonably practicable’ to hold an enquiry against him – 
Where such power has been exercised by the President or the 
Governor it may be in the interest of security of the State or if not 
expedient to hold such an enquiry, then exceptional power under 
clause (c) of second proviso to Art.311 ought to be exercised – In 
case such a decision invoking the extraordinary power is taken by 
the competent authority, the scope of judicial review is available 
to the Constitutional Courts wherein the reasons as assigned for 
satisfaction of the authority must be reasonable, valid, justified and in 
writing – Satisfaction as recorded must be the objective satisfaction 
on the basis of material brought on record which ordinarily the 
disciplinary authority may take as a prudent person, otherwise, 
dispensing with the enquiry not permissible in law – On facts, the 
power exercised by the authority is completely without application 
of mind, thus, the question of recording of satisfaction as affirmed 
by the appellate authority, the CAT and the High Court does not 
arise – Thus, the order dispensing with the regular procedure of 
inquiry is arbitrary and consequently the order of dismissal of the 
appellant to be quashed and the orders of the CAT and the High 
Court affirming the said dismissal order stand set aside – Order 
passed by the CAT and the High Court set aside and the order 
of dismissal passed by the DCP and confirmed by the appellate 
authority quashed – In consequence, the appellant to be reinstated 
with continuity of service, being entitled for all consequential benefits 
notionally – Since, the appellant found involved in a criminal case, 
back wages from the date of dismissal till reinstatement restricted 
to 50%. [Paras 40-43]
Case Law Cited
Union of India and Anr. v. Tulsiram Patel and Others [1985] Supp. 
2 SCR 131 : (1985) 3 SCC 398 – relied on.
Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and Ors. [1990] Supp. 3 SCR 
354 : (1991) 1 SCC 362 – held applicable.
Ex. Const. Chhote Lal v. Union of India & Ors. (2000) 10 SCC 
196; Sudesh Kumar v. State of Haryana and Ors. (2005) 11 SCC 
525; Tarsem Singh v. State of Punjab (2006) 13 SCC 581; State 
of Punjab v. Harbhajan Singh [2007] 11 SCR 752 : (2007) 15 
SCC 217; Reena Rani v. State of Haryana (2012) 10 SCC 215; 

360
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Risal Singh v. State of Haryana [2014] 7 SCR 544 : (2014) 13 
SCC 244; Sudesh Kumar v. State of Haryana and Ors. (2005) 11 
SCC 525 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Delhi Police (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 
1980; Delhi Police Act, 1978.
List of Keywords
Dismissal; Police constable; Without conducting departmental 
inquiry; Not reasonably practicable to hold inquiry; Special Cell; 
Reasonable belief of threat, intimidation and inducement to victim; 
Tampering of the vital evidence; Quashment of dismissal order.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 13860 
of 2024
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.02.2023 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in WP (C) No. 1309 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. V. Mohana, Sr. Adv., Sandeep Choudhary, Ram Niwas Buri, 
Basudeb Biswas, Naresh Sharma, Ms. Sreepriya K, Praveen Jain.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Brijender Chahar, A.S.G., Mukesh Kumar Maroria, Sanjay Kumar 
Tyagi, Mili Baxi, Rajat Nair, Vibhu Shanker Mishra, Aaditya Vikram.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1)	
The instant appeal is directed against the order dated 02.02.2023 
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi (hereinafter 
‘High Court’) disposing of the writ petition filed by the appellant 
questioning the order of dismissal from service dated 18.07.2017 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
361
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
passed by Deputy Commissioner of Police (hereinafter ‘DCP’), New 
Delhi, the Order of Appellate Authority dated 30.07.2018 and the 
Order dated 29.11.2022 passed by Central Administrative Tribunal, 
Principal Bench at New Delhi (hereinafter ‘CAT’) in OA No. 744 of 
2020. 
2)	
The appellant was dismissed from service by the DCP, Delhi vide 
order dated 18.07.2017, in exercise of the power under clause 
(b) of second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India 
without conducting departmental inquiry. The reason assigned for 
not resorting to the normal procedure prescribed under Delhi Police 
(Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1980 (hereinafter ‘1980 Rules’), 
was that Shri Govind Sharma, Assistant Commissioner of Police 
(hereinafter ‘ACP’) in the preliminary enquiry found that it would 
not be ‘reasonably practicable’ to conduct a regular departmental 
enquiry on account of reasonable belief of threat, intimidation and 
inducement to the victim and thereby creating the possibility of 
tampering of the vital evidence. 
3)	
The appeal against the said order was dismissed by the Special 
Commissioner of Police, Delhi vide order dated 30.07.2018 accepting 
the reasons as indicated in the order of dismissal. 
4)	
Being dissatisfied, the appellant filed OA No. 744 of 2020 before 
CAT seeking quashment of his dismissal order and the order of 
the appellate authority. The CAT referred to the stand as taken in 
the counter affidavit of the State, relied upon some judgments and 
declined to interfere, dismissing the Original Application filed by 
the appellant vide order dated 29.11.2022. Writ Petition (Civil) No. 
1309 of 2023 filed before the High Court of Delhi by the appellant 
was dismissed, accepting the same reasoning as taken by the DCP.
5)	
Ms. V. Mohana, learned senior counsel, appearing on behalf of 
the appellant, referring to Section 21 of the Delhi Police Act, 1978 
(hereinafter ‘1978 Act’) contends that the power of punishment 
conferred upon the competent authority is not absolute; it is subject 
to the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution of India and the 
1980 Rules referred above. Referring to Rule 6, she contended that 
punishment mentioned at Serial Nos. (i) to (vii) of Rule 5 therein are 
deemed to be ‘major penalties’ and the competent authority can award 
the same after regular departmental inquiry. It is contended that as 
per Rule 14(2), a punishment of major penalty ought to be awarded 

362
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
by the appointing authority only after the regular departmental inquiry. 
Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India contemplates that if a person 
is a member of a civil service of the Union or all India Service or 
a Civil Service of a State or holds a civil post under the Union or 
a State, he shall not be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank 
except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges 
against him and has been afforded reasonable opportunity of being 
heard. The first proviso contemplates that in case the penalty is 
required to be imposed on the basis of evidence adduced during the 
inquiry, it would not be necessary to afford an opportunity of making 
representation on the proposed penalty. Clause (b) of second proviso 
states that where the authority empowered to remove a person is 
satisfied for some reason to be recorded in writing, to the effect that 
holding an inquiry is not ‘reasonably practicable’, the orders can be 
passed without adhering to the general principle contemplated by 
Article 311(2). 
6)	
In reference to above, learned senior counsel submits that after 
registration of FIR No. 390 of 2017 on 28.06.2017, the appellant 
was taken into custody on 29.06.2017 and released on bail on 
14.10.2017. In the meanwhile, the competent authority, vide order 
dated 18.07.2017, in exercise of power under clause (b) of second 
proviso of Article 311 (2), indicating that possibility of traumatizing 
the witnesses may not be ruled out, dismissed him from service. 
It is forcefully contended that while the appellant was in custody, 
reason as assigned of intimidating or traumatizing the witnesses are 
flimsy. In absence of any convincing material, exercise of such extra-
ordinary power ignoring the procedure prescribed under the 1980 
Rules is not permissible otherwise it would amount to misuse of the 
power by the competent authority. In support of these contentions, 
learned senior counsel has placed reliance on the judgments of this 
Court in Union of India and Anr. v. Tulsiram Patel and Others1, 
Jaswant Singh v. State of Punjab and Ors.2, Ex. Const. Chhote 
Lal v. Union of India & Ors.3, Sudesh Kumar v. State of Haryana 
1	
(1985) 3 SCC 398
2	
(1991) 1 SCC 362
3	
(2000) 10 SCC 196

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
363
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
and Ors.4, Tarsem Singh v. State of Punjab5, State of Punjab v. 
Harbhajan Singh6, Reena Rani v. State of Haryana7, and Risal 
Singh v. State of Haryana8.
7)	
It is urged that the dismissal order passed by the competent authority 
and confirmed by the appellate authority is not legally sustainable 
and the CAT as well as the High Court have committed grave error 
in refusing to entertain the Original Application and the Writ Petition 
challenging the same. Therefore, the order of dismissal is liable to 
be quashed and set-aside. 
8)	
Per contra, learned Additional Solicitor General Mr. Brijender Chahar, 
representing the State, inter alia, relied upon the preliminary inquiry 
of the ACP and the documents collected, DD entries of information 
and proceedings and other relevant material in support of his 
contentions. As per him, these documents reflect that the complainant 
and witnesses could have been traumatized by the egregious act 
of appellant and his associates who are in the police department. 
Possibility of their association with criminals and to approach 
the complainant or witnesses to intimidate or to induce them for 
withdrawing from the case or to turn them hostile during trial cannot 
be ruled out. In light of such apprehension, power exercised by the 
competent authority for not proceeding with the normal procedure of 
departmental inquiry is within the scope of its authority. It is contended 
that the stand as taken by the Department has been accepted by 
the CAT and the High Court; therefore, interference is not warranted. 
9)	
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we find that since the 
power of punishment of the competent authority has been conferred 
upon it vide Section 21 and the procedure as prescribed under Section 
22 of the 1978 Act, they are relevant, hence, reproduced as under : 
“21. Powers of punishment.— (1) Subject to the 
provisions of article 311 of the Constitution and the rules, 
the Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner of 
Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Additional Deputy 
4	
(2005) 11 SCC 525
5	
(2006) 13 SCC 581
6	
(2007) 15 SCC 217
7	
(2012) 10 SCC 215
8	
(2014) 13 SCC 244

364
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police Training 
College or of the Police Training School or any other 
officer of equivalent rank, may award to any police officer 
of subordinate rank any of the following punishments, 
namely:— 
(a)	 dismissal; 
(b)	 removal from service; 
(c)	
reduction in rank; 
(d)	 forfeiture of approved service; 
(e)	 reduction in pay; 
(f)	
withholding of increment; and 
(g)	 fine not exceeding one month’s pay.
(2) Subject to the rules— 
(a) any police officer specified in sub-section (1) may 
award the punishment of censure to any police officer of 
subordinate rank; 
(b) the Assistant Commissioner of Police may award the 
punishment of censure to police officers of, or below, the 
rank of Sub-Inspectors of Police; 
(c) any police officer of, and above, the rank of Inspector 
may award punishment drill not exceeding fifteen days 
or fatigue duty or any other punitive duty to constables.
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall affect 
any police officer’s liability for prosecution and punishment 
for any offence committed by him. 
(4) The Commissioner of Police, Additional Commissioner 
of Police, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Additional 
Deputy Commissioner of Police, Principal of the Police 
Training College or of the Police Training School, 
Assistant Commissioner of Police, or any other police 
officer of equivalent rank may suspend any police officer 
of subordinate rank who is reasonably suspected to be 
guilty of misconduct, pending an investigation or enquiry 
into such misconduct. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
365
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
(5) An Inspector of Police may suspend any police 
officer below the rank of Sub-Inspector of Police, who is 
reasonably suspected to be guilty of misconduct, pending 
an investigation or enquiry into such misconduct. 
22. Procedure for awarding punishments.—When 
any officer passes an order of awarding a punishment of 
dismissal, removal from service, reduction in rank, forfeiture 
of service, reduction in pay, withholding of increments or 
fine, he shall record such order or cause the same to be 
recorded together with the reasons therefor, in accordance 
with the rules.”
From perusal of above provisions, it is clear that subject to Article 
311 of Constitution of India, Section 21 confers power upon the 
authorities prescribed therein to impose various types of punishments 
as specified in clauses (a) to (g) of sub-section (1) upon a police 
officer of subordinate rank. 
10)	 Further, Section 22 governs the procedure for awarding the 
punishment of dismissal, removal and reduction of rank and casts 
obligation upon the officer passing an order of punishment to record 
the reasons for such order in accordance with the rules. 
11)	 In this context, Rules 5 and 6 of 1980 Rules governing the procedure 
as applicable to punishment orders, are reproduced as thus:–
“5. Authorised punishments - The Delhi Police Act, 1978 
prescribed the following penalties : 
(i) Dismissal, (ii) Removal from service, (iii) Reduction in 
rank [for a specified period], (iv) Forfeiture of approved 
service, (v) Reduction in pay, (vi) Withholding of increments, 
(vii) Fine not exceeding one month’s pay, (viii) Censure, 
(ix) Punishment drill not exceeding 15 days or fatigue duty 
or any other punishment duty to Constable only.
6. Classification of punishments and authorities 
competent to award them - (i) Punishments mentioned 
at Serial Nos. (i) to (vii) above shall be deemed ‘major 
punishment’ and may be awarded by an officer not below 
the rank of the appointing authority or above after a regular 
departmental enquiry. 

366
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(ii) Punishment mentioned at Serial No. (viii) shall be 
called ‘minor punishment’ and may be awarded by the 
authorities specified in sub-section (i) of Section 21 of the 
Delhi Police Act, 1978 after serving a show cause notice 
giving reasonable time to the defaulter and considering 
his written reply as well as oral deposition, if any for which 
opportunity shall be afforded on request. 
Authority competent to 
award
Rank to whom it can be 
awarded
(i) Deputy Commissioner of 
Police and above
Inspector and below
(ii) Assistant Commissioner 
of Police
Constable to Sub-Inspector
(iii) The punishment mentioned at Serial No. (ix) above 
may be called Orderly Room punishment and shall be 
awarded after the defaulter has been marched and heard 
in Orderly Room by the Officer of and above the rank of 
Inspector as laid down in Section 21 (3) (c) of the Delhi 
Police Act, 1978.”
The present case relates to the punishment of dismissal. Therefore, 
as per classification contained in Rule 6, it is a major penalty, which 
can be inflicted after a regular departmental inquiry by a competent 
authority as specified therein. The manner and procedure for 
awarding the punishment is prescribed in Rule 14 and procedure 
for such regular departmental inquiry that has to be observed for 
awarding said punishment is contained in Rule 16. As such, in 
absence of the applicability of clause (b) of second proviso to Article 
311(2), the procedure contemplates that Sections 21 and 22 and 
the rules aforementioned ought to be followed for dismissal of an 
employee. 
12)	 In the case at hand, since the order of dismissal of the appellant has 
been passed in exercise of the power under clause (b) of second 
proviso to Article 311(2) of Constitution of India, the said provision 
is relevant to understand its ambit and scope, hence, reproduced 
as under: 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
367
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
“311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of 
persons employed in civil capacities under the Union 
or a State —
(1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the 
Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a State 
or holds a civil post under the Union or a State shall be 
dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate to that 
by which he was appointed. 
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or 
removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in 
which he has been informed of the charges against him 
and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
respect of those charges 
[Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to 
impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be 
imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during 
such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such 
person any opportunity of making representation on the 
penalty proposed: 
Provided further that this clause shall not apply— 
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced 
in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his 
conviction on a criminal charge; or 
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a 
person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some 
reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not 
reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or 
(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may 
be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the 
State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry. 
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question 
arises whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such 
inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon 
of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such 
person or to reduce him in rank shall be final.”

368
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
13)	 Upon perusal of the above, it is clear that as per Article 311(2) a 
member of the civil service of the Union or a State may be dismissed 
or removed or reduced in rank by the appointing authority after 
a regular inquiry on charges which have been informed to him, 
affording him a reasonable opportunity. As per first proviso thereto, 
in case an inquiry is conducted for the purpose of imposing penalty, 
it is not necessary to afford an opportunity to the appellant at the 
stage of penalty. 
14)	 Clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) restricts the 
applicability of Article 311(2) in a specific situation: (i) if the appointing 
authority is satisfied that there should be deviation from mandate 
of Article 311(2) because adherence to the same is not ‘reasonably 
practicable’; and (ii) such reasons are to be recorded in writing. 
Similarly, when such power is to be exercised under clause (c) of 
the second proviso by the President or the Governor, they may, in 
the interest of security of the State or if it is not expedient to hold 
such inquiry, deviate from the applicable procedure. 
15)	 Be that as it may, the present case relates to clause (b) of the second 
proviso to Article 311(2), therefore, we need to discuss in detail the 
applicability of the said provision in the facts of this case.
16)	 It is trite law that the decision of the appointing authority on the 
issue of recording reasons in writing on its satisfaction as to why 
holding an inquiry is not reasonably practicable may be subject to 
judicial review under Article 226 by High Court or under Article 32 by 
the Supreme Court. This Court in the Constitution Bench judgment 
rendered in the case of Tulsiram Patel (Supra) reiterated the legal 
positions and explained the same. The High Court in the impugned 
judgment has relied upon paragraph 101 of the said judgment. 
Learned senior counsel for the appellant contended before us that 
subsequent paragraphs, in particular, paragraphs 130, 133 and 
138, which enunciates the law while interpreting Article 311(2) of 
the Constitution of India, have not been considered. Therefore, for 
ready reference, we reproduce all the aforesaid paragraphs as thus: 
“101. Not only, therefore, can the principles of natural 
justice be modified but in exceptional cases they can 
even be excluded. There are well-defined exceptions 
to the nemo judex in causa sua rule as also to the audi 
alteram partem rule. The nemo judex in causa sua rule 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
369
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
is subject to the doctrine of necessity and yields to it as 
pointed out by this Court in J. Mohapatra & Co. v. State 
of Orissa [(1984) 4 SCC 103 : (1985) 1 SCR 322, 334-5] . 
So far as the audi alteram partem rule is concerned, both 
in England and in India, it is well established that where 
a right to a prior notice and an opportunity to be heard 
before an order is passed would obstruct the taking of 
prompt action, such a right can be excluded. This right 
can also be excluded where the nature of the action to 
be taken, its object and purpose and the scheme of the 
relevant statutory provisions warrant its exclusion; nor 
can the audi alteram partem rule be invoked if importing 
it would have the effect of paralysing the administrative 
process or where the need for promptitude or the urgency 
of taking action so demands, as pointed out in Maneka 
Gandhi case [(1978) 1 SCC 248 : (1978) 2 SCR 621, 676] 
at p. 681. If legislation and the necessities of a situation 
can exclude the principles of natural justice including the 
audi alteram partem rule, a fortiori so can a provision of 
the Constitution, for a constitutional provision has a far 
greater and all-pervading sanctity than a statutory provision. 
In the present case, clause (2) of Article 311 is expressly 
excluded by the opening words of the second proviso and 
particularly its keywords “this clause shall not apply”. As 
pointed out above, clause (2) of Article 311 embodies in 
express words the audi alteram partem rule. This principle 
of natural justice having been expressly excluded by a 
constitutional provision, namely, the second proviso to 
clause (2) of Article 311, there is no scope for reintroducing 
it by a side-door to provide once again the same inquiry 
which the constitutional provision has expressly prohibited. 
Where a clause of the second proviso is applied on an 
extraneous ground or a ground having no relation to the 
situation envisaged in that clause, the action in so applying 
it would be mala fide, and, therefore, void. In such a case 
the invalidating factor may be referable to Article 14. This 
is, however, the only scope which Article 14 can have in 
relation to the second proviso, but to hold that once the 
second proviso is properly applied and clause (2) of Article 
311 excluded. Article 14 will step in to take the place of 

370
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
clause (2) would be to nullify the effect of the opening 
words of the second proviso and thus frustrate the intention 
of the makers of the Constitution. The second proviso is 
based on public policy and is in public interest and for 
public good and the Constitution-makers who inserted it 
in Article 311(2) were the best persons to decide whether 
such an exclusionary provision should be there and the 
situations in which this provision should apply.
130. The condition precedent for the application of clause 
(b) is the satisfaction of the disciplinary authority that “it is 
not reasonably practicable to hold” the inquiry contemplated 
by clause (2) of Article 311. What is pertinent to note is that 
the words used are “not reasonably practicable” and not 
“impracticable”. According to the Oxford English Dictionary 
“practicable” means “Capable of being put into practice, 
carried out in action, effected, accomplished, or done; 
feasible”. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 
defines the word “practicable” inter alia as meaning 
“possible to practice or perform: capable of being put into 
practice, done or accomplished: feasible”. Further, the 
words used are not “not practicable” but “not reasonably 
practicable”. Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 
defines the word “reasonably” as “in a reasonable manner: 
to a fairly sufficient extent”. Thus, whether it was practicable 
to hold the inquiry or not must be judged in the context 
of whether it was reasonably practicable to do so. It is 
not a total or absolute impracticability which is required 
by clause (b). What is requisite is that the holding of the 
inquiry is not practicable in the opinion of a reasonable 
man taking a reasonable view of the prevailing situation. 
It is not possible to enumerate the cases in which it 
would not be reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry, 
but some instances by way of illustration may, however, 
be given. It would not be reasonably practicable to hold 
an inquiry where the government servant, particularly 
through or together with his associates, so terrorizes, 
threatens or intimidates witnesses who are going to give 
evidence against him with fear of reprisal as to prevent 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
371
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
them from doing so or where the government servant 
by himself or together with or through others threatens, 
intimidates and terrorizes the officer who is the disciplinary 
authority or members of his family so that he is afraid to 
hold the inquiry or direct it to be held. It would also not 
be reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry where an 
atmosphere of violence or of general indiscipline and 
insubordination prevails, and it is immaterial whether 
the concerned government servant is or is not a party to 
bringing about such an atmosphere. In this connection, we 
must bear in mind that numbers coerce and terrify while 
an individual may not. The reasonable practicability of 
holding an inquiry is a matter of assessment to be made 
by the disciplinary authority. Such authority is generally on 
the spot and knows what is happening. It is because the 
disciplinary authority is the best judge of this that clause 
(3) of Article 311 makes the decision of the disciplinary 
authority on this question final. A disciplinary authority is 
not expected to dispense with a disciplinary inquiry lightly 
or arbitrarily or out of ulterior motives or merely in order to 
avoid the holding of an inquiry or because the Department’s 
case against the government servant is weak and must 
fail. The finality given to the decision of the disciplinary 
authority by Article 311(3) is not binding upon the court 
so far as its power of judicial review is concerned and in 
such a case the court will strike down the order dispensing 
with the inquiry as also the order imposing penalty. The 
case of Arjun Chaubey v. Union of India [(1984) 2 SCC 
578 : 1984 SCC (L&S) 290 : (1984) 3 SCR 302] is an 
instance in point. In that case, the appellant was working 
as a senior clerk in the office of the Chief Commercial 
Superintendent, Northern Railway, Varanasi. The Senior 
Commercial Officer wrote a letter to the appellant calling 
upon him to submit his explanation with regard to twelve 
charges of gross indiscipline mostly relating to the Deputy 
Chief Commercial Superintendent. The appellant submitted 
his explanation and on the very next day the Deputy Chief 
Commercial Superintendent served a second notice on the 

372
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
appellant saying that his explanation was not convincing 
and that another chance was being given to him to offer his 
explanation with respect to those charges. The appellant 
submitted his further explanation but on the very next day 
the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent passed an 
order dismissing him on the ground that he was not fit to 
be retained in service. This Court struck down the order 
holding that seven out of twelve charges related to the 
conduct of the appellant with the Deputy Chief Commercial 
Superintendent who was the disciplinary authority and 
that if an inquiry were to be held, the principal witness 
for the Department would have been the Deputy Chief 
Commercial Superintendent himself, resulting in the same 
person being the main accuser, the chief witness and also 
the judge of the matter. 
138. Where a government servant is dismissed, removed 
or reduced in rank by applying clause (b) or an analogous 
provision of the service rules and he approaches either 
the High Court under Article 226 or this Court under Article 
32, the court will interfere on grounds well established in 
law for the exercise of power of judicial review in matters 
where administrative discretion is exercised. It will consider 
whether clause (b) or an analogous provision in the service 
rules was properly applied or not. The finality given by 
clause (3) of Article 311 to the disciplinary authority’s 
decision that it was not reasonably practicable to hold 
the inquiry is not binding upon the court. The court will 
also examine the charge of mala fides, if any, made in the 
writ petition. In examining the relevancy of the reasons, 
the court will consider the situation which according to 
the disciplinary authority made it come to the conclusion 
that it was not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry. 
If the court finds that the reasons are irrelevant, then the 
recording of its satisfaction by the disciplinary authority 
would be an abuse of power conferred upon it by clause (b) 
and would take the case out of the purview of that clause 
and the impugned order of penalty would stand invalidated. 
In considering the relevancy of the reasons given by the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
373
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
disciplinary authority the court will not, however, sit in 
judgment over them like a court of first appeal. In order 
to decide whether the reasons are germane to clause (b), 
the court must put itself in the place of the disciplinary 
authority and consider what in the then prevailing situation 
a reasonable man acting in a reasonable way would have 
done. The matter will have to be judged in the light of 
the then prevailing situation and not as if the disciplinary 
authority was deciding the question whether the inquiry 
should be dispensed with or not in the cool and detached 
atmosphere of a court-room, removed in time from the 
situation in question. Where two views are possible, the 
court will decline to interfere.”
17)	 Upon perusal of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in the 
case of Tulsiram Patel (Supra), it is luculent that the constitutional 
provision has a far greater and all-pervading sanctity than a statutory 
provision, therefore, second proviso restricts application of Article 
311(2) only in the circumstances as contemplated under Clauses (a), 
(b) and (c) of the second proviso. This clause uses the word “this 
clause shall not apply”, therefore, Article 311(2) shall not apply in 
the contingencies in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of the second proviso. 
The intention thereof has been expressed indicating that there is no 
scope for reintroduction of principles contained in Article 311(2) by a 
side door which the constitutional provision has expressly excluded. 
It is further clarified in the said judgement that if the second proviso 
is applied on an extraneous ground or a ground having no relation 
to the situation envisaged in that clause, the action of so applying 
would be mala fide and therefore void. This Court indicated that in 
such cases the invalidating factor may be referrable to the Article 
14 distinguishing between a situation where the proviso has been 
properly applied and one where it has been improperly applied. 
Otherwise, if Article 14 is applied in a manner to take the place of 
clause (2) that would mean to nullify the effect of opening words 
of the second proviso and frustrate the intention of makers of the 
Constitution. It is said that the second proviso is based on public 
policy and is in public interest and for public good.
18)	 The wording as used in clause (b) of the second proviso indicates 
the satisfaction of the Disciplinary Authority by using the word “it 

374
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
is not reasonably practicable to hold” the inquiry contemplated by 
clause 2 of Article 311. The Court emphasised the meaning of “not 
reasonably practicable” as juxtaposed against not “impracticable”. It 
is intended that the requirement to hold an inquiry is not practicable 
in the opinion of a reasonable man taking a reasonable view of 
the prevailing situation. The Court contemplated certain situations 
therein and said that a common man must bear in mind that numbers 
may coerce and terrify while an individual may not. The reasonable 
practicability of holding an inquiry is a matter of assessment to be 
made by the disciplinary authority holding the post and it is he who 
must visualize what is happening at the ground-zero. The Court 
clarified that the disciplinary authority is not expected to dispense with 
a departmental inquiry lightly or arbitrarily or out of ulterior motives 
or merely in order to avoid the holding of an inquiry or because the 
Department’s case against the government servant is weak and 
must fail. In this connection, referring Article 311(3), it is held that 
the finality given to the decision of the disciplinary authority is not 
binding upon the Courts and the scope of judicial review is open to 
strike down the order dispensing with the inquiry as also the order 
imposing penalty. 
19)	 Further, the Court emphasised the words used in clause (b) of second 
proviso that the disciplinary authority should record its reasons in 
writing for its satisfaction that holding an inquiry is not reasonably 
practicable. In case such reason is not recorded in writing or not 
valid and justifiable, the order dispensing with the inquiry and the 
order of penalty flowing therefrom would be void and unconstitutional. 
Emphasising the scope of judicial review, it is said that in the matters 
where administrative discretion is exercised, it is open to assail 
either under Article 226 before High Court or under Article 32 before 
this Court. Referring clause 3 of Article 311 and reiterating that the 
decision of disciplinary authority indicating why it is not reasonably 
practicable to hold an inquiry is not binding on Court and the scope 
of judicial review is open. In the said contingency, the Court will 
examine the charges of mala fides if any made in the Writ Petition. It 
is emphasised that the Court, while exercising judicial review, would 
not sit as an appellate court but it shall consider the situation due to 
which, according to the disciplinary authority, it was not reasonably 
practicable to hold an inquiry. While examining the relevance of the 
reasoning, the Court ought to place itself as a disciplinary authority 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
375
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
and consider whether in the prevailing situation, a reasonable man 
acting in a reasonable way, would have taken the same decision as 
taken by the disciplinary authority. If the Court finds that the reasons 
are irrelevant, then satisfaction of the disciplinary authority may be 
held to be an abuse of power. In that situation, it would be open 
to the Court to take the case out of purview of that clause and the 
order of penalty would stand invalidated.
20)	 In view of the foregoing conclusions of the Constitution bench in 
Tulsiram Patel (Supra), it can be safely observed that despite the 
use of the words “this clause shall not apply” in the second proviso, 
it shall not make power of Article 311(2) inapplicable. In fact, second 
proviso to Article 311 is an exception for dispensing with the inquiry 
on satisfaction by recording the reasons in writing by such authority. 
21)	 In view of the analysis of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in 
Tulsiram Patel (Supra), we have examined the impugned judgement 
passed by the High Court wherein in paragraph 19, while referring 
to the judgment of Sudesh Kumar vs. State of Haryana and Ors. 
(2005) 11 SCC 525 in respect of the principle of audi alteram partem 
and also referring to paragraph 101 of Tulsiram Patel (Supra), it has 
been observed by the High Court that the appellate authority had 
heard the appellant before affirming the decision of the disciplinary 
authority, it appears that the judgment of Sudesh Kumar (Supra) 
has not been appreciated in its true spirit by the High Court. 
22)	 In our view, the reasoning as given by the High Court is completely 
misplaced, in particular, when the Court is examining the scope and 
applicability of clause (b) to the second proviso of Article 311(2), 
the reasoning assigned by the disciplinary authority ought to be 
relevant for dispensing with an inquiry which is the issue involved 
in the present case. Merely indicating that the reasons provided in 
writing have already been held justified by the CAT would not be 
sufficient in the context of law laid down by the judgment of Tulsiram 
Patel (Supra) merely observing that opportunity of hearing has been 
afforded by the appellate authority.
23)	 This case was heard on 04.02.2026. At the time of hearing, learned 
ASG appearing on behalf of the State vociferously contended that the 
reasoning to dispense with the inquiry finds its place in the preliminary 
inquiry report of the ACP whereby it was found that the complainant/
witnesses have been traumatised, threatened or intimidated by the 

376
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
action of the criminals specially the police personnel involved therein 
and due to the close association of the police personnel with the 
hard-core criminals, there was every possibility that the appellant 
may approach the complainant/witnesses through his associates to 
threaten and intimidate them.
24)	 In this context, the argument advanced by the learned counsel for the 
appellant is that after lodging the FIR on 28.06.2017, the appellant 
was sent to custody on 29.6.2017 and was released on bail on 
14.10.2017. In the meanwhile, the dismissal order dated 18.07.2017 
was passed. Therefore, we deemed it appropriate to call for the said 
preliminary inquiry report which had not been placed before us for 
consideration. 
25)	 On production of the said preliminary inquiry report, we have 
examined the contents thereof. In the said report, the ACP has 
collected the information/documents in respect of the investigation 
of Constable Manohar Lal, No. 362/Special Cell, PIS No. 28070974 
(the appellant herein). He has also recorded the statement of the 
complainant, SI Hardeep Singh and other relevant persons. The 
details of the appointments and posting were collected from all 
concerned offices. Thereafter the details of the incidence were 
recorded. During preliminary inquiry, the ACP collected documents 
viz DD entries of information and proceedings of FIR No. 390/2017, 
arrest memo, personal search memo, disclosure memo, pointing out 
memo, seizure memos of mobile phone, recovery memos, PC remand, 
TIP Proceedings and other miscellaneous facts and documents. In 
the report, the ACP has recorded the statements of complainant 
Maniram, IO Hardeep Singh, HC Kuldeep Singh and Ct. Devender, 
viz. reproduced as under: 
“a) Complainant Maniram s/o Late Ram Prasad r/o Vill. 
Sisahi, PS Rasoolabad, Distt Kanpur, UP, Aged 62 years – 
In his statement, he corroborated the facts as mentioned 
in the FIR and his joining investigation, participating of 
TIP and identification of Ct. Manohar Lal No. 362/Spl. Cell 
as one of the accused who had come to his godown on 
27/06/17, at about 6.00 PM and made enquiry about the 
owner and details of goods/articles stored in godown. He 
also came back at around 8.30 – 9.00 PM to godown with 
a tempo and car. He also participated in forcibly breaking 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
377
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
open the room where logs of sandalwood were kept and 
loading approx. 1355 Kg of sandalwood in tempo. He also 
took away SIM of his mobile phone with the help of other 
accused persons. 
b) Statement of IO, SI Hardeep Singh D-5776, PIS No. 
16150006, PS Bhalswa Dairy, mobile number-8510901900- 
In his statement he stated that on receipt of complaint 
of Mr. Maniram s/o Late Ram Prasad r/o Vill. Sisahi, PS 
Rasoolabad, Distt Kanpur, UP above case corroborated the 
facts as mentioned in the FIR NO. 390/17 dated 28/06/17 
u/s 419/457/380/392/412/34 IPC PS was registered in PS 
Bhalswa Dairy. He also stated that during investigation he 
served notice u/s 160 of Cr.P.C. to Ct Manohar Lal 362/
Spl. Cell and on 30/06/2017, on the basis of sufficient 
evidences, he was arrested in this case. He prepared 
arrest memo and personal search. He had also recorded 
the disclosure memo, prepared pointing out memos and 
recovered case property on the instance of Ct. Manohar 
Lal No. 362/Spl. Cell. He also stated that Ct. Manohar Lal 
No. 362/Spl. Cell refused to participate in TIP proceedings 
and during further investigation, the complainant identified 
Ct. Manohar Lal No. 362/Spl. Cell as one of the accused 
persons. 
c) Statement of HC Kuldeep Singh No. 254/NW, PIS 
No 28981354, P.S-Bhalswa Dairy, New Delhi. In his 
statement, he has stated that on 30/06/2014, he alongwith 
Constable Devender joined investigation of his case. On 
30/06/2017, Constable Manohar Lal No. 362/Spl Cell joined 
investigation and on the basis of sufficient evidences, SI 
Hardeep Singh arrested him and prepared arrest memo, 
personal search memo, disclosure statement, pointing 
out memo and recovery memo of 14 jute bags containing 
680.35 kgs of Sandalwood and he has signed on relevant 
documents as true. 
d) Statement of Ct Devender no 1227/NW, PIS No 
29101653, P.S- Bhalswa Dairy, New Delhi. In his statement, 
he has stated that on 30/06/2017, he alongwith Head 
Constable Kuldeep Singh joined investigation of this 

378
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
case. On 30/06/2014, Constable Manohar Lal No. 362/
Spl Cell joined investigation and on the basis of sufficient 
evidences, SI Hardeep Singh arrested him and prepared 
arrest memo, personal search memo, bags containing 
680.35 kgs of Sandalwood and he has signed on relevant 
documents as true.”
26)	 While concluding in the preliminary inquiry, ACP observed as thus:
“From the above noted facts, information, documents 
and statements, it is clearly established that Ct. Manohar 
Lal No. 362/Spl. Cell, PIS No. 28070974 while posted in 
Special Cell and on Earned Leaves, along with other police 
personnel and public persons is found involved in robbery 
case has shown grave misconduct, high handedness and 
had brought bad name to the entire force of Delhi Police 
by having acted in a manner highly unbecoming of a 
police personnel. 
From the preliminary enquiry conducted, it is revealed 
that the complainant/witnesses of the case has been 
traumatized by the egregious act of Ct. Manohar Lal 
No. 362/Spl. Cell and his associates. It appears that Ct. 
Manohar Lal No. 362/Spl. Cell, still has close association 
with criminals and there is every possibility that he may 
approach the complainant through his associates to 
threaten, intimate or induce him to withdraw from the case 
or turn hostile during the trial.” 
27)	 On perusal of conclusion of the preliminary report, it reveals that 
the complainant/witnesses had been traumatized by the egregious 
acts of the appellant and his associates. It has been recorded that 
the appellant had close association with criminals and there was 
every possibility that he might approach the complainant through 
his associates to threaten, intimidate or induce him to withdraw from 
the case or turn hostile during the trial.
28)	 After perusal of the statements of the complainant-Mani ram, SI 
Hardeep Singh, HC Kuldeep Singh and Constable Devender Singh 
reproduced above in the preliminary report, it can be seen that no 
instance of traumatising the complainant or witnesses have been 
stated by any witness in their statements. Whether the act as alleged 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
379
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
in the FIR is egregious in nature, would be a subject matter of trial. 
No material showing connection of the appellant and his associates 
with criminals which may reasonably demonstrate that there is a 
possibility of the complainant or witnesses being approached through 
his associates with an intent to threaten, intimidate or induce them 
to withdraw from the case or turn hostile is on record. In absence 
of any material, in our view, it is merely a presumption of the ACP 
who conducted the preliminary enquiry and it cannot form the basis 
of a reasonable apprehension which may be sufficient to dispense 
with the regular disciplinary inquiry. 
29)	 The DCP while passing the order of dismissal on 18.07.2017 recorded 
the following reasons: 
“Ordinarily a departmental enquiry should be conducted 
before imposing major punishment including dismissal 
against the defaulter but the facts and circumstances of 
the present case and the preliminary enquiry report of Sh. 
Govind Sharma, ACP/SR are such that it would not be 
reasonably practicable to conduct a regular departmental 
enquiry against the defaulter as there is a reasonable 
belief of threat, intimidation and inducement to the victim 
and thereby creating the possibility of tempering of the 
vital evidence. Therefore, holding the regular departmental 
enquiry in this case shall create fear in the mind of the 
complainant, witness/es and discourage him/them from 
deposing against the defaulter during the enquiry. Further, 
an extended enquiry would only cause more trauma to 
the complainant/victim. It is under these given set of 
compelling circumstances that action under Article 311(2)
(b) of The Constitution of India has been invoked against 
Ct. Manohar lal, No.362/Spl.Cell in this case.
Therefore, I, Sanjeev Kumar Yadav, Deputy Commissioner 
of Police, Special Cell, New Delhi do hereby order 
to dismiss Ct. Manohar Lal, No.362/Spl.Cell, PIS No. 
28070974 from service with immediate effect, under Article 
311(2)(b) of The Constitution of India. His suspension 
period from 30.06.2017 (date of his arrest) till the date 
of issue of this order is decided as period “Not Spent on 
Duty” for all intents and purposes and the same will not 
be regularized in any manner.”

380
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
30)	 From the order of dismissal passed by the DCP, it is clear that 
he has relied upon the preliminary inquiry report of the ACP and 
recorded its satisfaction that holding an enquiry is not ‘reasonably 
practicable’ and therefore, determined that this case is a fit case to 
apply the exclusion as contained in clause (b) of second proviso to 
Article 311 (2).
31)	 After appreciating the reasoning given in the report of the ACP as 
per the above discussion, in our view, in the statement of witnesses 
no incident of traumatising the complainant and witnesses have 
been recorded, therefore, nothing is available on record to accept 
the plea of threatening, intimidation or inducement to any witness to 
turn hostile. The disciplinary authority proceeded on the presumption 
of the ACP who conducted preliminary enquiry without any material 
and concluded that holding a regular enquiry is not reasonably 
practicable. Analysing the purport of the proviso and the interpretation 
made in the judgment of Tulsiram Patel (Supra) it was the duty of 
the disciplinary authority to satisfy himself that such reasoning as 
indicated in the preliminary enquiry report is based on some material, 
sufficient to dispense with an enquiry. In absence of the same, merely 
belief or a presumption is not sufficient to record such finding and to 
deviate from the normal procedure. It is not out of place to mention 
that the order of dismissal was passed on 18.07.2017. The appellant 
was taken into custody on 29.06.2017 and he was only be released 
on bail on 14.10.2017. In such a situation it is clear that while he 
was in custody the order of dismissal was passed. Therefore, it 
was incumbent upon the ACP holding the preliminary enquiry to 
indicate any instances of threat from custody to the complainant or 
to intimidate witnesses brought during investigation. In the preliminary 
enquiry report none of the witnesses have indicated about threat or 
intimidation or possibility of threat to turn those witnesses hostile, 
therefore, we have no hesitation to say that the order passed by 
the disciplinary authority dispensing with the enquiry as required is 
without application of mind and cannot be sustained. In fact, it is 
the duty of the disciplinary authority to record satisfaction how and 
in what manner holding an enquiry is not reasonably practicable.In 
our view, the authority has completely failed to understand the letter 
and spirit of Tulsiram Patel (Supra) while passing the order that too 
without any basis to dispense with normal procedure and directed 
dismissal which cannot be countenanced. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
381
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
32)	 In the similar set of facts, the relevance of the material placed for 
recording the satisfaction by the Disciplinary Authority has been 
considered by this Court in the case of Jaswant Singh (Supra). In 
the said case, particularly in paragraph 5, the Court referred all the 
detailed facts and also relied upon the observations in Tulsiram Patel 
(Supra). The reasoning as given in the said judgement applies in the 
facts of this case also, the relevant para 5 is reproduced as thus:
“5. The impugned order of April 7, 1981 itself contains the 
reasons for dispensing with the inquiry contemplated by 
Article 311(2) of the Constitution. Paragraph 3 of the said 
order, which we have extracted earlier, gives two reasons 
in support of the satisfaction that it was not reasonably 
practicable to hold a departmental enquiry against the 
appellant. These are (i) the appellant has thrown threats 
that he with the help of other police employees will not 
allow holding of any departmental enquiry against him and 
(ii) he and his associates will not hesitate to cause physical 
injury to the witnesses as well as the enquiry officer. Now 
as stated earlier after the two revision applications were 
allowed on October 13, 1980, the appellant had rejoined 
service as Head Constable on March 5, 1981 but he was 
immediately placed under suspension. Thereafter, two 
show cause notices dated April 4, 1981 were issued against 
him calling upon him to reply thereto within 10 days after 
the receipt thereof. Before the service of these notices the 
incident of alleged attempt to commit suicide took place 
on the morning of April 6, 1981 at about 11.00 a.m. In that 
incident the appellant sustained an injury on his right arm 
with a knife. He was, therefore, hospitalised and while he 
was in hospital the two show cause notices were served 
on him at about 10.00 p.m. on April 6, 1981. Before the 
appellant could reply to the said show cause notices 
respondent 3 passed the impugned order on the very 
next day i.e. April 7, 1981. Now the earlier departmental 
enquiries were duly conducted against the appellant and 
there is no allegation that the department had found any 
difficulty in examining witnesses in the said inquiries. 
After the revision applications were allowed the show 
cause notices were issued and 10 days time was given to 

382
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the appellant to put in his replies thereto. We, therefore, 
enquired from the learned counsel for the respondents to 
point out what impelled respondent 3 to take a decision 
that it was necessary to forthwith terminate the services 
of the appellant without holding an inquiry as required by 
Article 311(2). The learned counsel for the respondents 
could only point out clause (iv)(a) of sub-para 29(A) of the 
counter which reads as under:
“The order dated April 7, 1981 was passed as the petitioner’s 
activities were objectionable. He was instigating his fellow 
police officials to cause indiscipline, show insubordination 
and exhibit disloyalty, spreading discontentment and 
hatred, etc. and his retention in service was adjudged 
harmful.”
This is no more than a mere reproduction of paragraph 
3 of the impugned order. Our attention was not drawn to 
any material existing on the date of the impugned order 
in support of the allegation contained in paragraph 3 
thereof that the appellant had thrown threats that he and 
his companions will not allow holding of any departmental 
enquiry against him and that they would not hesitate to 
cause physical injury to the witnesses as well as the enquiry 
officer if any such attempt was made. It was incumbent 
on the respondents to disclose to the court the material 
in existence at the date of the passing of the impugned 
order in support of the subjective satisfaction recorded 
by respondent 3 in the impugned order. Clause (b) of 
the second proviso to Article 311(2) can be invoked only 
when the authority is satisfied from the material placed 
before him that it is not reasonably practicable to hold 
a departmental enquiry. This is clear from the following 
observation at page 270 of Tulsiram case [(1985) 3 SCC 
398 : 1985 SCC (L&S) 672 : 1985 Supp 2 SCR 131] : 
(SCC p. 504, para 130)
“A disciplinary authority is not expected to 
dispense with a disciplinary inquiry lightly or 
arbitrarily or out of ulterior motives or merely 
in order to avoid the holding of an inquiry or 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
383
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
because the department’s case against the 
government servant is weak and must fail.”
The decision to dispense with the departmental enquiry 
cannot, therefore, be rested solely on the ipse dixit of 
the concerned authority. When the satisfaction of the 
concerned authority is questioned in a court of law, it is 
incumbent on those who support the order to show that 
the satisfaction is based on certain objective facts and is 
not the outcome of the whim or caprice of the concerned 
officer. In the counter filed by respondent 3 it is contended 
that the appellant, instead of replying to the show cause 
notices, instigated his fellow police officials to disobey the 
superiors. It is also said that he threw threats to beat up 
the witnesses and the Inquiry Officer if any departmental 
inquiry was held against him. No particulars are given. 
Besides it is difficult to understand how he could have given 
threats, etc. when he was in hospital. It is not shown on 
what material respondent 3 came to the conclusion that the 
appellant had thrown threats as alleged in paragraph 3 of 
the impugned order. On a close scrutiny of the impugned 
order it seems the satisfaction was based on the ground that 
he was instigating his colleagues and was holding meetings 
with other police officials with a view to spreading hatred 
and dissatisfaction towards his superiors. This allegation 
is based on his alleged activities at Jullundur on April 3, 
1981 reported by SHO/GRP, Jullundur. That report is not 
forthcoming. It is no one’s contention that the said SHO 
was threatened. Respondent 3’s counter also does not 
reveal if he had verified the correctness of the information. 
To put it tersely the subjective satisfaction recorded in 
paragraph 3 of the impugned order is not fortified by any 
independent material to justify the dispensing with of the 
inquiry envisaged by Article 311(2) of the Constitution. 
We are, therefore, of the opinion that on this short ground 
alone the impugned order cannot be sustained.”
33)	 It is not out of place to say that the judgment of Tulsiram Patel 
(Supra) has been appreciated by the Department and resultantly, 
the Commissioner of Police has issued a circular dated 31.12.1998. 
Analysis as made hereinabove, particularly in paragraphs 17, 18 

384
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and 19, have been truly introduced in the circular of the department. 
The relevant portion of the said circular is reproduced for ready 
reference as thus: -
“Instances have come to notice where provisions of Article 
311(2)(b) of the Constitution were inappropriately invoked. 
This article provides that no person as mentioned in 311(2)
(b) shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank 
except after an enquiry in which he has been informed of 
the charge against him and given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard in respect of these charges.
Provided that where it is proposed after such enquiry to 
impose upon him any such penalty, such penalty may be 
imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during such 
enquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person 
any opportunity of making representation on the penalty 
proposed. Provided further that this clause shall not apply 
where an authority empowered to dismiss or to remove a 
person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some 
reason to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not 
reasonably practicable to hold such enquiry.
Clause (3) of Article 311 provides that if in respect of 
such person as aforesaid a question arises whether it is 
reasonably practicable to hold such enquiry as it referred 
to in clause (2) the decision thereon of the authority 
empowered to dismiss or to remove such person or to 
reduce him in rank shall be final.
From the above it is clear that a civil servant is not be 
dismissed, removed or reduced in rank similarly under 
Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India but after holding 
regular departmental enquiry against him. No doubt the 
above provisions confers the power of infliction of above 
penalties on the disciplinary authority but while doing 
so circumstances will have to be mentioned in order to 
show as to how it was not reasonably practicable to hold 
the departmental action. In a number of authorities the 
Court/Tribunal have evaluated the reasons given by the 
disciplinary authority to see if really it was impracticable 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
385
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
to hold the enquiry and for those reasons are indifferent 
and vague. Reliance may be placed in the judgment of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Tulsi Ram 
Patel AIR 1985 SC 1416 which reads as under:
“It would not be reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry 
where the government servant, particularly through or 
together with his associates, so terrorizes, threatens or 
intimidates witnesses who are going to give evidence 
against him with fear of reprisal as to present them for doing 
so or where the government servant by himself or together 
with or through others threatens, intimidates and terrorizes 
the officer who is the disciplinary authority or members of 
his family so that he is afraid to hold the enquiry or direct 
it to be held. It would also not be reasonable practicable 
to hold the enquiry where an atmosphere of violation or 
of great indiscipline and insubordination prevails and it is 
immaterial where the concerned government servant is or 
is not a party to bringing such an atmosphere.
In this connection, we must bear in mind that numbers 
coerce and terrify while an individual may not. The 
reasonable practicability or holding an inquiry is a matter 
of assessment to be made by the disciplinary authority. 
Such authority is generally on the spot and knows what 
is happening. It is because the disciplinary authority is 
best judge of this that clause (3) of Article 311 makes 
the decision of the disciplinary authority on this question 
final. A disciplinary authority is not expected to dispense 
with a disciplinary inquiry lightly or arbitrarily or out of 
ulterior motives or merely in order to avoid the holding 
of an enquiry or because the Department’s case against 
the government servant is weak and must fail. The finality 
given to the decision of the disciplinary authority by Article 
311(3) is not binding upon the court so far as its power of 
judicial review is concerned and in such a case the court 
will strike-down the order dispensing with the enquiry as 
also the order imposing penalty.”
Power under Article 311(2) is not be used a short cut.

386
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
The police officers involved in the cases of Rape or 
Dacoity or any such heinous offence have been dismissed 
straightway under Article 311(2)(b) despite the fact that 
criminal cases have been registered. Such dismissal 
without holding D.Es. are illegal because in such cases 
D.E. can be conveniently held. 
It is once again emphasized that the Disciplinary Authority 
should not take resort to Article 311(2)(b) lightly but only in 
those cases where it is not reasonably practicable to hold 
the enquiry. Whenever the disciplinary authority comes to 
the conclusion that it is not reasonably practicable to hold 
an enquiry he must record at length cogent and legally 
tenable reasons for coming to such conclusion. In the 
absence of valid reasons, duly reduced in writing, no such 
order of dismissal etc. with resort to Article 311(2)(b) can 
be sustained in law.
This circular supersedes the earlier circular No.25551-
631/29.12.93.”
34)	 The said circular was in supersession of all earlier circulars. A further 
clarification was issued by the department on 11.09.2007 which 
was in vogue on the date of passing of the order of dismissal. The 
relevant portion of the clarificatory circular is also reproduced as thus:
“As analysis has been done by PHQ in 38 cases pertaining 
to the period between 1.1.2000 to 31.12.2005 where 
action under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India 
was taken against the defaulters. The analysis shows 
that out of the 38 cases, the action of the department has 
been upheld by CAT only in two cases and out of these 
two cases, in only one case the action was upheld by the 
Hon’ble High Court of Delhi. Most of these cases have 
been remanded back to the Department by the Tribunal 
for initiating department enquiry.
Though some cases are still pending in the Hon’ble 
High Court for decision. In a majority of the cases, 
Disciplinary Authorities have resorted to Article 311(2)
(b) on assumptions and conjectures. No speaking orders 
were passed based on and supported by material/facts 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
387
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
on record for dispensing with prior enquiry. Orders for 
dismissal were passed arbitrarily violating Article 311 and 
the principles of natural justice.
Henceforth, it has been decided that whenever any 
Disciplinary Authority intends to invoke Article 311(2)(b) of 
the Constitution of India, he must keep in mind the judgment 
in the case of UOI v. Tulsi Ram Patel, AIR 1985 SC 1416. 
Only in cases where Disciplinary Authority is personally 
satisfied on the basis of material available on the file that 
the case is of such a nature that it is not practicable to 
hold an enquiry in view of threat, inducement, intimidation, 
affiliation with criminals etc and keeping in view the specific 
circumstances of the case it is not possible that PWs will 
depose against the defaulter and disciplinary authority has 
no option but to resort to Article 311(2)(b) should such an 
action be taken. Prior to such an order, a PE has to be 
conducted and it is essential to being on record all such 
facts. It has also been decided that before passing an order 
under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution, Disciplinary 
Authority has to take prior concurrence of Spl. CP/Admn.
This has the approval of C.P. Delhi.”
35)	 In the case at hand after registration of the FIR when the appellant 
was in custody the order of dismissal was passed. He was released 
only thereafter. As such, without indicating any instance of intimidation, 
traumatising, threatening or persuading the complainant or the 
witness to turn hostile from inside the jail, the belief or presumption 
as recorded by the disciplinary authority is not sufficient to bring 
the present case within the exception to Article 311(2) by applying 
clause (b) of second proviso thereto. Thus, in our view, the reasoning 
contemplated in the judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) applies in 
the case at hand. 
36)	 It is relevant to note that applying the judgment of Tulsiram Patel 
(Supra), various cases have been decided by this Court indicating 
what may be a sufficient reason and how and in what circumstances 
holding a departmental enquiry is not reasonably practicable, and 
the scope of judicial review in such cases. In the judgement of this 
Court in Ex. Constable Chhote Lal (Supra) the Court held as thus: 

388
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“4. Having examined the rival contentions of the parties and 
bearing in mind the law laid down by this Court indicating 
the circumstances under which the inquiry under Article 
311(2), second proviso, clause (b) of the Constitution can 
be dispensed with and applying the same to the facts 
and circumstances and the reasons advanced by the 
authorities in arriving at the decision, we have no hesitation 
to come to the conclusion that the order dispensing with 
the departmental inquiry is not in accordance with law and 
necessarily the order of dismissal cannot be sustained. 
We accordingly set aside the order of dismissal passed 
against the appellant and permit the departmental authority 
to hold an inquiry if so desired, in accordance with law and 
come to the conclusion in the said proceeding.
5. Normally, an order of dismissal on being set aside, the 
employee can claim back wages, but in this case we are not 
inclined to grant back wages to the employee concerned, 
more so, in view of the nature of charges against him.” 
37)	 In the case of Tarsem Singh (Supra) this Court has observed that the 
power of dispensing with the constitutional remedy of a delinquent, 
should not be exercised lightly or arbitrarily, or out of ulterior motive 
with the intent to avoid holding an enquiry. In the said case in paras 
10 and 14, this Court observed as thus: 
“10. It is now a well-settled principle of law that a 
constitutional right conferred upon a delinquent cannot be 
dispensed with lightly or arbitrarily or out of ulterior motive 
or merely in order to avoid the holding of an enquiry. The 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant 
has taken us through certain documents for the purpose 
of showing that ultimately the police on investigation did 
not find any case against the appellant in respect of the 
purported FIR lodged against him under Section 377 IPC. 
However, it may not be necessary for us to go into the 
said question.
xxx
xxx
xxx
14. In view of the fact that no material had been placed 
by the respondents herein to satisfy the Court that it was 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
389
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
necessary to dispense with a formal enquiry in terms 
of proviso (b) appended to Clause (2) of Article 311 of 
the Constitution of India, we are of the opinion that the 
impugned orders cannot be sustained and they are set 
aside accordingly. The appellant is directed to be reinstated 
in service. However, in view of our aforementioned 
findings, it would be open to the respondents to initiate 
a departmental enquiry against the appellant if they so 
desire. Payment of back wages shall abide by the result 
of such enquiry. Such an enquiry, if any, must be initiated 
as expeditiously as possible and not later than two months 
from the date of communication of this order.” 
38)	 This Court in the case of Risal Singh (Supra), emphasised that 
while assigning the reason in writing it is imperative that such 
reason must be plausible and based on definite material. In the 
said case, the Court relied upon on para 130 on the judgment of 
Tulsiram Patel (Supra) and referring the same concluded in paras 
9 and 10 as thus: 
“9. Tested on the touchstone of the aforesaid authorities, 
the irresistible conclusion is that the order passed by 
the Superintendent of Police dispensing with the inquiry 
is totally unsustainable and is hereby annulled. As the 
foundation founders, the order of the High Court giving the 
stamp of approval to the ultimate order without addressing 
the lis from a proper perspective is also indefensible and 
resultantly, the order of dismissal passed by the disciplinary 
authority has to pave the path of extinction.
10. Consequently, we allow the appeal and set aside the 
order passed by the High Court and that of the disciplinary 
authority. The appellant shall be deemed to be in service 
till the date of superannuation. As he has attained the age 
of superannuation in the meantime, he shall be entitled to 
all consequential benefits. The arrears shall be computed 
and paid to the appellant within a period of three months 
hence. Needless to say, the respondents are not precluded 
from initiating any disciplinary proceedings, if advised in 
law. As the lis has been pending before the Court, the 
period that has been spent in Court shall be excluded 

390
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
for the purpose of limitation for initiating the disciplinary 
proceedings as per rules. However, we may hasten to 
clarify that our observations herein should not be construed 
as a mandate to the authorities to initiate the proceeding 
against the appellant. We may further proceed to add 
that the State Government shall conduct itself as a model 
employer and act with the objectivity which is expected 
from it. There shall be no order as to costs.”
39)	 In the case of Reena Rani (Supra) this Court has again applied 
the law laid down in the judgment of Tulsiram Patel (Supra) and 
Jaswant Singh (Supra) and held that the order of dismissal did 
not disclose the reasons explaining why it was not reasonably 
practicable to hold a regular departmental enquiry and applicability 
of the proviso in such a case is not justified. The Court in para 7 in 
the said judgment observed as under: - 
“7. In the order of dismissal, the Superintendent of 
Police has not disclosed any reason as to why it was 
not reasonably practicable to hold regular departmental 
enquiry. The learned Additional Advocate General fairly 
stated that the order of dismissal does not contain the 
reasons as to why it was not reasonably practicable to hold 
regular departmental enquiry against the appellant. He also 
admitted that no other record has been made available to 
him which would have revealed that the Superintendent 
of Police had recorded reasons for forming an opinion 
that it was not reasonably practicable to hold regular 
departmental enquiry for proving the particular charge(s) 
against the appellant.” 
40)	 On overall analysis of the intent of Article 311(2), it is vivid that an 
employee holding a post in Union or State ought not to be dismissed 
or removed by an authority subordinate to the one by which he was 
appointed. It is further specified that a person shall be dismissed or 
removed or reduced in rank after an inquiry supplying the charges if 
any against him and giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
in respect of those charges. The applicability of the said clause is 
restricted in a situation wherein his conduct led to his conviction of 
criminal charges or where the authority empowered who dismissed, 
removed or reduced in rank records reason in writing upon satisfaction 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
391
Manohar Lal v. Commissioner of Police & Ors.
that it is not ‘reasonably practicable’ to hold an enquiry against him. 
In addition, where such power has been exercised by the President 
or the Governor it may be in the interest of security of the State or if 
not expedient to hold such an enquiry, then exceptional power under 
clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311 ought to be exercised. 
41)	 In case such a decision invoking the extraordinary power is taken 
by the competent authority in light of the judgment Tulsiram Patel 
(Supra) within the parameter as discussed, the scope of judicial 
review is available to the Constitutional Courts wherein the reasons 
as assigned for satisfaction of the authority must be reasonable, 
valid, justified and in writing. In addition, the satisfaction as recorded 
must be the objective satisfaction on the basis of material brought 
on record which ordinarily the disciplinary authority may take as 
a prudent person. Otherwise, dispensing with the enquiry is not 
permissible in law. In the present case, Section 21 of the 1978 Act 
confers power of punishment and Section 22 prescribes the procedure 
for awarding such punishment. The procedure as contemplated has 
been elaborated under the 1980 Rules. In the present case, in our 
view, the power exercised by the authority is completely without 
application of mind, thus, the question of recording of satisfaction 
as affirmed by the appellate authority, the CAT and the High Court 
does not arise. Therefore, we can hold that the order dispensing with 
the regular procedure of inquiry is arbitrary and consequently the 
order of dismissal of the appellant is liable to be quashed and the 
orders of the CAT and the High Court affirming the said dismissal 
order stand set aside. 
42)	 In light of the above discussion, the irresistible conclusion is to 
set aside the order passed by the CAT and the High Court and to 
quash the order of dismissal passed by the DCP and confirmed by 
the appellate authority. In consequence, the appellant shall forthwith 
be reinstated with continuity of service. He shall be entitled for all 
consequential benefits notionally. Since, the appellant is allegedly 
found involved in a criminal case, therefore, in the facts of the 
case, back wages from the date of dismissal till reinstatement are 
restricted to 50%. 
43)	 The setting aside of the order passed under Article 311(2) proviso 
(b) of the Constitution and direction for reinstatement shall be 

392
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
without prejudice to the right of the respondent to take recourse 
as permissible by initiating a departmental enquiry in accordance 
with law. Accordingly, and with the aforesaid directions, the present 
appeal stands allowed to the extent indicated. Parties to bear their 
own costs.
44)	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
