[2026] 3 S.C.R. 556 : 2026 INSC 223
Sanjay Kumar Sharma
v.
State of Bihar & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1304 of 2026)
11 March 2026
[Sanjay Kumar and K. Vinod Chandran,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the High Court was justified in acquitting 
the accused despite the alleged dying declarations, motive and 
testimony of witnesses relied upon by the prosecution to establish 
the prosecution case.
Headnotes†
Evidence Act, 1872 – s.32 – Dying declaration – Evidentiary 
value – Shanty in which the old couple were residing gutted 
in a fire, killing the old man immediately and his wife died two 
days later in a hospital – Prosecution case that the younger 
son and daughter-in-law of the couple, due to previous land 
disputes, torched the hut with the intention to murder the 
parents – Trial court convicted the accused, however, the 
High Court acquitted him – Correctness: 
Held: In the totality of the circumstances as coming out from 
the evidence, the High Court perfectly correct in acquitting the 
accused – Unable to find that the dying declarations alleged to 
have been made to the witnesses are credible or even probable, 
especially considering the fact that the deceased is alleged to have 
made the statement immediately after sustaining grievous burn 
injuries – Investigation was a sham and was premeditated, throwing 
to the winds every tenet of criminal jurisprudence informed by due 
procedure – Prosecution, was a farce, parading witnesses whose 
testimonies fell flat – Investigation and prosecution premised on 
the motive alleged and nothing more – None of the incriminating 
circumstances including that of the motive, the complaints filed by 
the deceased against the accused, the various dying declarations 
* Author

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
557
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
and the medical evidence were put to the accused – Investigation 
carried out grossly deficient – Scene mahazar not drawn up, no 
forensic examination carried out at the scene of crime and no 
independent witnesses arrayed – Causation of fire not investigated, 
the presence of the accused in the vicinity of the crime scene not 
established – Delay in registration of FIR despite the information 
having been received at the police station earlier, and police 
personnel including the I.O having visited the scene of occurrence 
where number of villagers were present was a serious lapse – 
Delay caused and the manner in which the FIS recorded throws 
suspicion on the very conduct of the I.O – Dying declarations should 
have been recorded with more caution and when taken inside the 
hospital it should have ideally been recorded in the presence of 
a Doctor, whose certification also ought to have been obtained – 
Incriminating circumstances that come out in a trial are to be put to 
the accused in its entirety, solemn duty enjoined both on the Court 
and the Prosecutor equally, failing which the entire prosecution 
may fail for that sole reason – There are lapses in investigation, 
which could have been avoided. [Paras 26, 28, 31-33]
Evidence Act, 1872 – s.32 – Dying declaration – Evidentiary 
value – Important species of evidence – Explanation:
Held: Dying declaration is an important species of evidence 
capable of proving the crime proper and identifying the accused, 
an exception to hearsay having been provided by s.32 – Dying 
declaration, for reliance should inspire confidence in the Court as to 
its credibility – Court should be satisfied it is made by the deceased 
without any prompting or tutoring or coercion or is a mere figment 
of imagination, then conviction can be based solely on the dying 
declaration and there is no requirement of any corroboration – It 
can be reduced to writing or can be oral, as testified by reliable 
witnesses – It can be one or numerous and if more than one; 
exculpatory and inculpatory, it is for the Court to find out which 
is believable – It can be a lengthy one or a short one, so far as 
the crime is spoken of and identification of the perpetrator comes 
through – It can be a single narrative or in a question and answer 
form – It can either have a history of the rancour between the 
perpetrator and the victim or can be merely the brief statement of 
the incident – Capacity of the injured to make the statement, both 
physical and mental, need not be necessarily certified by a doctor 

558
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and would rest again on the satisfaction of the Court on an analysis 
of the testimony of the witnesses and the other evidence coming 
forth in trial – If the Court is satisfied of the fit state of mind of 
the injured from the evidence on record, contrary medical opinion 
or absence of it will be inconsequential – It can be made before 
Magistrate; Executive or Judicial, Doctor, Police Officer, relative or 
third party whose presence is not doubtful – Desire of the declarant 
to live, through the truth despite fear of imminent death cannot 
be easily brushed aside – If the statement is doubtful then one or 
more of the above aspects could result in dying declaration being 
eschewed completely; based on the facts of each case. [Para 13]
Case Law Cited
Laxman v. State of Maharashtra [2002] Supp. 1 SCR 697 : (2002) 
6 SCC 710; Sher Singh and Another v. State of Punjab [2008] 2 
SCR 959 : (2008) 4 SCC 265; Atbir v. Government of NCT of Delhi 
[2010] 9 SCR 993 : (2010) 9 SCC 1; Bhajju @ Karan Singh v. 
State of Madhya Pradesh [2012] 5 SCR 37 : (2012) 4 SCC 327; 
Ashabai v. State of Maharashtra [2013) 1 SCR 115 : (2013) 2 SCC 
224; Satish Chandra v. State of M.P. [2014] 6 SCR 23 : (2014) 6 
SCC 723; Amol Singh v. State of M.P. [2008] 8 SCR 956 : (2008) 
5 SCC 468; Lakhan v. State of M.P. [2010] 9 SCR 705 : (2010) 
8 SCC 514; Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab [1957] SCR 953 : 
AIR 1957 SC 637 – referred to.
List of Acts
Evidence Act, 1872; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Investigation; Dying declarations; Conviction based solely on 
dying declaration; Exculpatory and inculpatory; Complete chain of 
circumstances; Memo of arrest; Sham investigation; Incriminating 
circumstances; Finding of guilt beyond all reasonable doubt.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1304 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 13.08.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Patna in CRADB No. 1271 of 2017

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
559
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Smarhar Singh, Surjeet Singh, Rajesh Kumar, Ms. Shweta Kumari, 
Pankaj Prakash, Mohd Asim, Manoj Kumar, Yash Thakur.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Vipin Sanghi, Sr. Adv., Azmat Hayat Amanullah, Ms. Rebecca 
Mishra, Suraj Kundu, Ms. Vanshita Gupta, Ms. Ekta Kundu, 
Om Prakash, Vikas Singh Jangra, Samar Vijay Singh, Bhakti 
Vardhan Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
Overzealous investigation is as fatal to prosecution as are the lethargic 
and the tardy. Framing a case on public perceptions and personal 
predilections ends up in a mess, often putting to peril an innocent 
and always letting free the perpetrator. Here, we have a case of 
gruesome death of a couple when their house was gutted in a fire, 
with the son and daughter-in-law accused of murder. The entire case 
is founded on motive; the ill-will the son harbored against the father 
for not having given him his due share in the ancestral property. 
The entire village was against the son and the mishap ended in 
an investigation where truth was sacrificed at the altar of perceived 
vengeance, ably assisted by the Investigating Officer’s selective but 
careless pursuits, derailing the entire prosecution. 
3.	
On the early hours of 23.11.2016, a shanty in which a lawyer and his 
wife were residing was gutted in a fire, killing the old man immediately 
and his wife after two days in a hospital at Patna. It was alleged that 
the younger son and daughter-in-law of the couple, due to previous 
enmity arising from land disputes, torched the hut with the intention 
to murder the parents. In defense, as is permissible, inconsistent 
stances were taken; of the neighbour, who was managing the 
properties of the deceased, and the elder son having colluded to 
murder the couple and an accidental fire, by reason of the cooking 

560
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
gas cylinder bursting. The Trial Court convicted the accused, while 
the High Court acquitted him. We are faced with the divergent 
findings of the Trial Court and the High Court; that of the High Court 
by its order of acquittal having fortified the presumption of innocence 
available to the accused.
4.	
Sri Smarhar Singh, Advocate-on-Record, appearing for the petitioner, 
the elder son of the deceased, argued that the High Court has 
completely lost sight of the evidence in the case and entered an 
acquittal totally ignoring the dying declarations. In addition to the 
recorded dying declarations as coming out from the First Information 
Statement (FIS) and that recorded by PW8, a Block Development 
Officer (BDO), PWs 1 to 3, 5 and 6 also spoke of the statement 
made by one of the deceased pinning the dastardly act of setting 
ablaze the hut and murdering the parents on the accused. There 
was sufficient evidence to prove the motive, which together with the 
dying declarations ought to have persuaded the High Court to affirm 
the conviction ordered by the Trial Court. The Doctor who carried 
out the post-mortem spoke only of 60% burns and confirmed the 
mental status of the deceased, who spoke about the cause of her 
death and that of her husband. A number of decisions are placed 
before us to put forth the contention that a dying declaration can 
be solely relied on to enter a conviction. In the present case, there 
was sufficient corroboration from the medical evidence, the motive 
proved and the testimony of witnesses who reached the crime spot 
immediately afterwards. The High Court ought to have ensured that 
the parricide was not left unavenged, when egregiously the accused 
were acquitted without a proper appreciation of the evidence.
5.	
Sri Amanullah, learned Counsel appearing for the State sought to 
uphold the conviction of the Trial Court and reverse the order of 
acquittal especially pointing out the dastardly crime. The testimonies 
of the witnesses, the dying declaration and the motive proved ought 
to have convinced the High Court about the culpability of the accused 
is the contention.
6.	
Sri Vipin Sanghi, learned Senior Counsel for the accused pointed out 
the lapses in the investigation and the concerted effort to somehow 
punish the accused, by manufacturing evidence not only in the form of 
inconsistent dying declarations but also by way of interested testimony 
of the witnesses. There was a clear pick and choose employed in 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
561
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
bringing witnesses to the trial, all interested and by their testimony 
validating the defense of a cooked-up prosecution story. The learned 
counsel for the accused also urged the laxity with which the Trial 
Court considered the matter. None of the incriminating circumstances 
were put to the accused under Section 313 of Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 19731 and the defense set up was given a complete go 
by. The Trial Court proceeded on merely surmises and conjectures 
without looking into the relevant aspects in the testimony of the 
witnesses, which would validate the defense of the accused, either 
of a motivated accusation having been levelled or an accidental fire 
having occurred, the defense being entitled to take different pleas.
7.	
In the context of the divergent findings and the peculiar circumstance 
of a son (A1) and daughter-in-law (A2) being accused of murdering 
A1’s parents we have examined the records and the evidence with 
a hawk’s eye. Since the learned counsel for the appellant had 
relied primarily on the dying declarations, with reference to various 
decisions we will have to first look at the decisions placed before 
us. Laxman v. State of Maharashtra2 was a Constitution Bench 
decision examining a reference based on two conflicting decisions. 
The conflict was insofar as the certification of the doctor regarding 
the condition of the patient who makes the dying declaration. While 
one of the decisions held that the certification should be to the 
effect that the person making that declaration is in a fit state of 
mind, another coordinate Bench held that if the materials on record 
indicate the deceased to be fully conscious, the declaration made 
immediately prior to death cannot be ignored, merely for reason of 
the absence of a certification by a doctor that the deceased was 
in a fit state of mind to make such a declaration. The Constitution 
Bench without relying on the moral premise that ‘no man would 
like to meet his maker with a lie in his mouth’, based itself on more 
practical grounds. Their Lordships relied on the juristic theory of 
such declaration being made in extremity, at the time of imminent 
death, when every hope in life is gone, every motive to falsehood 
is silenced and the only inducement is the desire to speak truth. 
However, it was observed that great caution has to be exercised 
in considering the weight to be given to this species of evidence 
1	
For brevity, ‘the Cr.P.C.’
2	
(2002) 6 SCC 710

562
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
on account of existence of many circumstances which may affect 
the truthfulness and correctness of a statement made, the author 
of which cannot be cross-examined. There is always the possibility 
of tutoring or prompting or a product of imagination, which the 
Court should be satisfied, does not exist. The Court also should be 
satisfied as to the situation the injured is placed in to take stock of 
the incident and identify the assailant as also the fitness of mind 
& body to subsequently speak about it. Normally, Courts look for 
medical evidence to assess the mental condition of the deceased 
while making a dying declaration, but it is not a rigid rule. Where, 
from the attendant circumstances, as spoken of by the witnesses 
and brought out by valid evidence if the Court is able to satisfy itself 
that the declaration was made in a fit and conscious state, then a 
contrary medical opinion cannot prevail and even its total absence 
would be inconsequential. The declaration made by a three Judge 
Bench that in the absence of medical certification that the injured 
was in a fit state of mind, it would be risky to accept the subjective 
satisfaction of a Magistrate as to the state of mind was held to be 
too broadly stated and not the correct enunciation of law; deprecated 
as a hyper-technical view especially in that case where there was 
available, certification of the doctor to the effect that the patient was 
conscious, but without the injured being expressly stated to be in 
a fit state of mind.
8.	
The law as elaborated in the Constitution Bench decision would 
be sufficient to evaluate the dying declaration in the present case. 
However, on the insistence made by the appellant, who had lost 
both his parents in a fire, an alleged murder which the Trial Court 
found established and the High Court reversed on reasonable doubt 
expressed, we would look at the other decisions also.
9.	
Sher Singh and Another v. State of Punjab3 was a case of bride-
burning with multiple dying declarations, the first exonerating the 
accused, and then more, in one voice implicating them. The first 
dying declaration recorded by a police officer was in the presence of 
the mother-in-law, which was resiled from in the declaration recorded 
by the Executive Magistrate after two days. The earlier statement 
was stated to be due to a threat that she would not be taken to the 
3	
(2008) 4 SCC 265

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
563
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
hospital unless she spoke of an accidental fire. This was repeated 
in the subsequent oral dying declarations, to her uncle, and a Sub-
Inspector which were believed by this Court.
10.	 Atbir v. Government of NCT of Delhi4 was a murder by a lady and 
her son of the second wife and two children. The conviction was on 
the sole basis of the dying declaration made by the stepdaughter who 
was admitted to the hospital with grievous injuries in the nature of 
stab wounds. On an analysis of various decisions of this Court, the 
principles were encapsulated in paragraph 22 which reads as under:
“22. The analysis of the above decisions clearly shows that:
(i) Dying declaration can be the sole basis of conviction 
if it inspires the full confidence of the court.
(ii) The court should be satisfied that the deceased was 
in a fit state of mind at the time of making the statement 
and that it was not the result of tutoring, prompting or 
imagination.
(iii) Where the court is satisfied that the declaration is 
true and voluntary, it can base its conviction without any 
further corroboration.
(iv) It cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law 
that the dying declaration cannot form the sole basis of 
conviction unless it is corroborated. The rule requiring 
corroboration is merely a rule of prudence.
(v) Where the dying declaration is suspicious, it should not 
be acted upon without corroborative evidence.
(vi) A dying declaration which suffers from infirmity such 
as the deceased was unconscious and could never make 
any statement cannot form the basis of conviction.
(vii) Merely because a dying declaration does not contain 
all the details as to the occurrence, it is not to be rejected.
(viii) Even if it is a brief statement, it is not to be discarded.
4	
(2010) 9 SCC 1

564
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(ix) When the eyewitness affirms that the deceased was not 
in a fit and conscious state to make the dying declaration, 
medical opinion cannot prevail.
(x) If after careful scrutiny, the court is satisfied that it is 
true and free from any effort to induce the deceased to 
make a false statement and if it is coherent and consistent, 
there shall be no legal impediment to make it the basis of 
conviction, even if there is no corroboration.”
Therein the dying declaration, which was the FIS was recorded by 
an Inspector in the presence of a doctor and then registered as an 
FIR, signed also by the doctor certifying her fit mental state.
11.	 Bhajju @ Karan Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh5 was again 
concerned whether a death by burning in the marital house, was 
accidental or homicidal. After the dying declaration recorded by the 
Executive Magistrate within two hours of the incident, an affidavit 
was sworn to by the deceased exonerating the in-laws. Death having 
occurred a month after the incident, the first declaration was held 
truthful, which stood corroborated by PW2 and PW3 who took the 
deceased with 60% burns to the hospital. The dying declaration 
by the injured; burnt at only the lower part of the body was found 
to be reliable since it gave a cogent and possible scenario of the 
occurrence further corroborated by stab wounds.
12.	 Ashabai v. State of Maharashtra6 dealt with four dying declarations 
which consistently spoke about the role played by the mother-in-law 
and the sister-in-law in torching the injured. The mere fact that in 
one of the statements, two others were implicated was found to be 
not sufficient to discard the role of the in-laws. Satish Chandra v. 
State of M.P.7 dealt with a suicide in which the dying declaration 
was made as a continuous narrative. It was held that though this 
Court had found that statements in the form of question and answer 
would be more appropriate, a credible declaration should not be 
eschewed on the grounds of existence of more details or presence 
of family members, when there is no indication of tutoring by the 
5	
(2012) 4 SCC 327
6	
(2013) 2 SCC 224
7	
(2014) 6 SCC 723

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
565
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
family. Amol Singh v. State of M.P.8 and Lakhan v. State of M.P.9 
clarified that it is not the plurality of dying declarations that matter, 
but the reliability, which is the significant aspect. Any inconsistency 
would only compel the Court to examine it carefully, as to whether 
those are material or not. 
13.	 From a conspectus of the above decisions, it is clear: That, a dying 
declaration is a very important species of evidence capable of proving 
the crime proper and identifying the accused, an exception to hearsay 
having been provided by Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act. That, 
a dying declaration, for reliance should inspire confidence in the Court 
as to its credibility. That, the Court should be satisfied it is made 
by the deceased without any prompting or tutoring or coercion or is 
a mere figment of imagination. That, then conviction can be based 
solely on the dying declaration and there is no requirement of any 
corroboration. That, it can be reduced to writing or can be oral, as 
testified by reliable witnesses. That, it can be one or numerous and if 
more than one; exculpatory and inculpatory, it is for the Court to find 
out which is believable. That, it can be a lengthy one or a short one, 
so far as the crime is spoken of and identification of the perpetrator 
comes through. That, it can be a single narrative or in a question 
and answer form. That, it can either have a history of the rancour 
between the perpetrator and the victim or can be merely the brief 
statement of the incident. That, the capacity of the injured to make 
the statement, both physical and mental, need not be necessarily 
certified by a doctor and would rest again on the satisfaction of the 
Court on an analysis of the testimony of the various witnesses and 
the other evidence coming forth in trial. That, if the Court is satisfied 
of the fit state of mind of the injured from the evidence on record, a 
contrary medical opinion or an absence of it will be inconsequential. 
That, it can be made before a Magistrate; Executive or Judicial, a 
Doctor, a Police Officer, a relative or a third party whose presence is 
not doubtful. That, the desire of the declarant to live, through the truth 
despite fear of imminent death cannot be easily brushed aside. The 
decisions also caution us that if the statement is doubtful then one 
or more of the above aspects could result in the dying declaration 
being eschewed completely; based on the facts of each case.
8	
(2008) 5 SCC 468
9	
(2010) 8 SCC 514

566
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
14.	 As a corollary, it also has to observed: That, if there is an iota of 
suspicion the Court has to look for corroboration. That, the medical 
certification as to the physical and mental state always aids in arriving 
at a satisfaction. That, in the wake of multiple grievous injuries or 
a higher percentage of burns, the declaration could be in question 
and answer form, lending more credence as actually spoken of by 
the injured as opposed to a long drawn out narrative, which could 
be mistook as supplied by interested related parties. That, a dying 
declaration recorded by the Judicial Magistrate, adds credence 
since they are trained to record such declarations. That, as far as 
possible, the recording is to be done in the presence of the Doctor 
and definitely not in the presence of numerous bystanders; which 
could lead to a defence being raised of prompting and tutoring. That, 
the veracity of the declaration has to come forth from the attendant 
circumstances as brought out in evidence.
15.	 We cannot but notice that in the present case, there is a plethora 
of dying declarations which we will examine one by one. There are 
two dying declarations reduced to writing and quite a few oral ones, 
testified by the witnesses, the written ones being examined first. The 
FIS itself is by the victim recorded by PW7, PSI of the jurisdictional 
Police Station, in the presence of PW1, the witness who came to 
the crime scene on hearing a shout and saw the villagers trying to 
put out the fire. The evidence of PW7 indicates that he was informed 
of the fire in the village Mahadeopur by the SHO of Banmankhi 
Police Station. PW7 immediately rushed to the crime scene with 
the SHO and a Sub-Inspector and found the house of the deceased 
completely gutted. The body of Sarangdhar Singh was found burnt 
and his wife, Kamala Devi, as informed by the villagers, was taken 
to the hospital for treatment. 
16.	 Neither is evidence led of a diary entry made in the police station, 
of the phone call to the SHO nor is the SHO examined to speak 
on the phone call received. Strangely, despite the SHO, the Sub-
Inspector and the PSI; PW7, having reached the scene there is no 
FIS recorded from any of the persons who were at the spot, including 
the witnesses paraded before Court, PW2, PW4 and PW5 who had 
not accompanied the injured lady to the hospital. PW1 is said to 
have taken the injured lady to the hospital along with his brother 
Nirmal, Nirdhan and Ajay Yadav. PW7 deposed that he went to the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
567
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
hospital, after carrying out the inquest of Sarangdhar Singh, where 
the FIS was recorded as the statement of the injured victim, Kamla 
Devi. The FIR narrates about the details of her family, the enmity 
with the younger son, and the crime, alleged on the younger son 
and the daughter-in-law at 1.30 am. PW7, Investigating Officer (I.O) 
took the thumb impression of PW1 and the deceased in the FIS.
17.	 Interestingly, the FIR was registered at 9.00 am on 23.11.2016 while 
the police party had been to the scene of occurrence where the 
villagers including the close relatives of the deceased were gathered, 
when the fire was raging. Even at the hospital where Kamala Devi 
was under treatment the villagers and relatives had gathered and 
there was no valid cause to record an FIS from the victim, who was 
grievously scorched. If it had to be done, then it was expedient that 
a medical certification was taken. The FIS has a long narrative of the 
history of the family dispute, highly improbable from a lady burned 
seriously. The FIS was admittedly recorded when the villagers and 
relatives of the deceased were standing around. These aspects 
considered in the given circumstances puts to peril the veracity 
of the FIS. Admittedly the deceased were inside the house and 
presumably sleeping, given the time of the incident. There is little 
possibility of the inmates of the house having seen the crime proper 
and the possibility is more that the villagers who gathered there could 
present a better picture, especially the woman whose shouts woke 
the neighbours. The attempt of the prosecution to give the FIS an 
elevated status of a dying declaration hence falls flat on that count 
too as it does not inspire confidence.
18.	 We then come to the statement recorded by the BDO, PW8 at 
11.30 am on the same day at Sadar Hospital, Araria. There, the 
narration about the history/motive was far lesser but as earlier, the 
crime proper is said to have been perpetrated by the younger son 
who came along with his wife and two other unknown persons and 
set fire to the residential house. PW7, I.O in his testimony before 
Court, on questioning by the Court, stated that the dying declaration 
is in his handwriting and the BDO signed it. PW7 & PW8, the BDO, 
an Executive Magistrate spoke of the villagers and relatives of the 
injured being present when the statement was recorded and that 
PW8 read over the statement to the persons present. No invalidity 
perse comes forth from that, but it raises questions, with reference 
to the overall circumstances and the lurking suspicion of a false 

568
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
accusation in the form of a declaration made by another person 
or through prompting. The BDO also spoke of having taken down 
the statement himself quite contrary to the statement of the IO. It 
was deposed that a doctor was taking care of the injured in which 
circumstance a certification could have been obtained about the fit 
state or at least the consciousness of the injured. Neither was such a 
medical certification taken nor does PW8 speak of the doctor having 
informed him about the physical and mental condition of the injured. 
The circumstances as coming out from the testimony of PW7 and 
PW8 persuade us to disbelieve the second dying declaration also 
for that too inspires no confidence.
19.	 Now, we come to the testimonies of the witnesses as to the incident 
itself. PW1 testified that he came out of his house on hearing the 
shouts of the wife of Vido Yadav, at his door steps and saw the house 
burning down. The husband had died and the wife, Kamla Devi was 
alive but “burnt little”. The dying declaration made by Kamla Devi to 
PW1 was that Soni, her daughter-in-law had poured hot water on 
her body and A1 having put their house on fire. PW2 testifies that 
he woke up on hearing Anmol Yadav’s wife shout and on coming 
out of his house witnessed the burning down of the house. It was 
his deposition that Kamla Devi was inside the house and he along 
with PW1 and Ajay Kumar tore the window and took Kamla Devi 
out, not spoken of by PW1. PW2’s deposition is that Kamla Devi told 
them that “you people should immediately go and save Dadaji, Mukul 
and his wife will kill him” (sic-as available from the translation from 
the records). PW1 and PW2 testified that they along with Ajay took 
Kamla Devi to the hospital in a tempo. PW3 spoke of coming out of 
the house when Munnar Yadav’s daughter-in-law started shouting. 
His testimony was that “the old lady said that Mukul and his wife 
set the house on fire” (sic deposition of PW3). 
20.	 PW4 came out of his house on hearing a commotion and tried to 
douse the fire. He spoke of many villagers having gathered at the 
scene. He also spoke of Kamla Devi having been burnt badly and 
found mumbling in a weak state. Contrary to his statement under 
Section 161, Cr. PC, he denied Kamla Devi having made a dying 
declaration. PW5 was the brother of Sarangdhar Singh, who spoke 
of Kamla Devi having come out after breaking the latch, with the help 
of the villagers. He also spoke of a dying declaration made by the 
injured, that Saurabh Kumar alias Mukul and his wife Soni burned 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
569
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
herself and her husband. PW6, the elder son of the deceased also 
deposed that when he saw his mother at the hospital she made a 
statement about the culpability of his brother and sister-in-law. PW7, 
I.O however stated that no such statement was recorded from PW6 
under Section 161, in his cross-examination. 
21.	 We would not discard the oral dying declarations for reason of the 
inconsistency in narration. There cannot be any insistence that the 
exact words of the victim should come out from the witnesses. What 
has been narrated conveys the culpability, if it can be believed. 
That being said we cannot but notice that all the witnesses arrayed 
before the Trial Court spoke of the villagers having reached the spot 
before them. Three witnesses specifically spoke of the shouts of a 
lady having woken them up. They described the lady, differently, 
as Vido Yadav’s wife, Anmol Yadav’s wife and the daughter-in-law 
of Munnar Yadav, from which we can infer that there were at least 
two persons who saw the fire, before the witnesses paraded before 
Court. Even if it is assumed that the lady spoken of by the three 
witnesses was the very same person, she was the best witness who 
could have been examined with respect to the first indication of the 
crime. In fact, PW2 and PW3 specifically speak of that lady having 
been engaged in threshing paddy. There was every possibility of 
her having witnessed the fire breaking out and could have better 
explained the causation. The non examination of the crucial witness, 
spoken of by the witnesses who reached the place later, on hearing 
her shouts, is a very serious lacuna in prosecution. 
22.	 In this context, we have to specifically notice the defence; that 
PW1, who was managing the properties of the deceased had an 
eye on it and he, in collusion with PW6 had connived to exclude 
A1 from his due share. PW5, the brother of the deceased husband 
also is alleged to have aligned with the other son to exclude A1 
from his inheritance. PW1, PW5 & PW6, hence, according to the 
accused are interested witnesses. PW2 is the nephew of PW1 and 
PW3 is the brother of PW1 again disclosing an interest against the 
accused . PW4, the grandnephew of the deceased husband spoke 
only of having witnessed the fire and the death of his granduncle 
and denied the dying declaration, quite contrary to the version of 
the other witnesses. All the witnesses spoke of a motive of the 
accused which was the exclusion of due share in the properties of 

570
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the deceased. PW6, the other son of the deceased in answer to a 
question put by the Court categorically stated that he and his brother 
will have 50% share in the property and that he is willing to give the 
due share of the property to the accused, which he had obtained 
through a partition suit; thus demolishing the motive projected by 
the prosecution. In the totality of the circumstances, we are unable 
to find that the dying declarations alleged to have been made to 
the witnesses are credible or even probable, especially considering 
the fact that the deceased is alleged to have made the statement 
immediately after sustaining grievous burn injuries. 
23.	 The postmortem report of the deceased husband indicates that he 
sustained 100% burns. The degree of the burn injuries suffered 
by the deceased wife is not mentioned in the report prepared by 
PW10, the doctor who carried out the postmortem. However, he 
stated that she had sustained 60% injuries, which is stated for the 
first time before Court and without the same being recorded in the 
report. Surprisingly, PW10 also stated, on a specific query made by 
the Court that looking at the postmortem report, the victim would 
have been in a fit state of mind to make the dying declaration. We 
are unable to find any credence to the said certification which a 
pathologist cannot discern by merely looking at the postmortem 
report. The burn injuries, pertinently are not confined to the lower 
body. The injuries interalia are stated to be:
“Epidermal to Dermo Epidermal burn injury over both 
lower thigh and lower limb upto ankle, both upper limb, 
back of chest, abdomen, part of pelvis, right side face and 
neck with line of redness, hyperemia and areas of hyper 
coagulated tissues and blister formation at place.”
The injuries thus were not confined to the lower body and even a 
medical expert examining the cadaver cannot come to the conclusion 
that, when alive the deceased was in a fit state of mind to give a 
dying declaration. 
24.	 PW6 attempted to establish the enmity between his father and 
brother by production of Exhibit P4 to P10, complaints made by his 
deceased father and mother against his brother. Exhibit P4 to P9 
which were partially burnt were said to have been obtained from 
the crime scene. It is pertinent here to notice that PW7, the I.O. 
did not think it fit to even draw up a scene mahazar of the crime 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
571
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
scene. From the evidence, it is clear that the house was thatched 
and had bamboo doors, good tinder for fire. The witnesses had 
spoken of a gas connection in the house and the defence was also 
that the fire was caused when the gas cylinder burst. There was 
no investigation on that count and the I.O. did not even carry out a 
forensic examination of the site to find out the cause of fire, whether 
it was arson or accidental. In fact the I.O in his evidence as PW7 
stated that there were no half-burnt items found in the crime scene 
which he had visited four times. PW5, the brother of the deceased 
husband had also stated in response to the query made by Court 
that the entire goods of the house were burnt. It was stated that the 
police had made a list of the goods that were saved from burning and 
that the list was prepared in his presence. The witness also deposed 
that since the goods were burnt, the police had left them as such. 
25.	 Exhibit P4 to P9, partially burnt complaints, according to PW6 were 
recovered from the crime scene which he did not think fit to handover 
to the I.O. The reliance placed by the trial court on the documents 
produced by PW6 cannot be accepted, for its genuineness being 
suspect and the same having been not produced before Court as 
required in a criminal trial, after drawing up a seizure mahazar, as 
recovered from the crime scene or even handed over by one of 
the witnesses and the same being made a part of the record of 
incriminating documents handed over to the accused.
26.	 In the totality of the circumstances as coming out from the evidence, 
we are convinced that the High Court was perfectly correct in 
acquitting the accused. Rather than providing a complete chain of 
circumstances, with the connecting links establishing the guilt of 
the accused and bringing forth no hypothesis other than the guilt of 
the accused, here the circumstances bring out a conscious effort to 
nail the accused with the crime of arson and pre-meditated murder. 
Except PW4, the other witnesses spoke of bitterness between the 
father and the son due to property disputes. PW6, the son of the 
deceased and the brother of A1 though spoke of the bitterness 
between his father and brother, in the same breath deposed that 
he was willing to give 50% share of the properties to his brother; in 
which event, there is no cause for enmity between the father and the 
son. The testimonies of the witnesses paraded before Court was that 
the entire village was against the conduct of the younger son of the 

572
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
deceased. However, this was spoken of by the interested witnesses 
as alleged by the defence. PW1 was alleged to be interested in the 
properties of the deceased and PW1, PW2 and PW3 were closely 
related. PW5 is said to have aligned himself with PW6, the other 
son of the deceased. PW4, another close relative did not speak of 
enmity between the father and the son of such a gravity to motivate 
the son to kill his father. 
27.	 Further, PW1 himself stated that the second accused and the children 
stayed at the house of the deceased for 20 days before the incident. 
It is also deposed that 17 days prior to the incident the police took the 
deceased husband and his son to the police station for counselling, 
not spoken of by the I.O who was a PSI in the jurisdictional Police 
Station. Pertinent is the fact that none of the witness spoke of the 
presence of the accused in the village at any time contemporaneous 
to the incident, especially when admittedly the accused along with 
their children were staying at a different location. The memo of arrest 
is not available in the records and the I.O makes a casual reference 
to the arrest having been made on the road going from Purnia to 
Banmankhi, near village Dhima. The accused were alleged to have 
resided in the house of one Lali @ Lalwa, two weeks back when 
they came to the village, who was not examined by the police or 
arrayed as a witness in the prosecution launched.
28.	 The entire village had gathered at the scene of occurrence and 
the witnesses paraded were not the persons who reached there 
first. The lady spoken of by PW1 to PW3 whose shouts woke them 
up, had not been examined. PW2, PW4 and PW5 also spoke of 
the deceased Kamla Devi having been removed to the hospital by 
PW1 along with one Nirdhan Yadav and Ajay Yadav, both of whom 
were not examined before Court. There was a concerted effort by 
the I.O not to bring any independent witnesses to the stand. The 
investigation, according to us was a sham and was pre-meditated, 
throwing to the winds every tenet of criminal jurisprudence informed 
by due procedure. The prosecution, hence, was a farce, parading 
witnesses whose testimonies fell flat. The investigation and the 
prosecution was premised on the motive alleged and nothing more.
29.	 We would also notice with some anguish the manner in which the 
trial court examined the accused under Section 313, Cr. PC. There 
were only four questions put to both the accused. Question No.1 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
573
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
was with respect to the allegation that on 23.11.2006 at around 
1:30 in the night, the accused together went to the house of the 
father of the first accused with common intention and killed them 
by putting the house to fire. The second question was about the 
allegation of the house of Sarangdhar Singh having been torched 
and the dying declaration made by Kamla Devi that the accused, 
together with two unknown persons put the house on fire and thus 
murdered Sarangdhar Singh. Question No.3 was with respect to the 
allegation that 15 days before the incident, the accused had gone 
to Mahadeopur village and stayed in the house of Lali @ Lalwa and 
that four days before the incident they went to their parents’ house. 
Question No.4 was as to the defence. Both the accused replied in the 
negative to the first three questions and the first accused in defence 
stated that PW1, the one who managed his father’s properties, his 
elder brother PW6 and his uncle PW5, were attempting to grab his 
property after excluding him from the same.
30.	 We cannot but notice that none of the incriminating circumstances 
including that of the motive, the complaints filed by the deceased 
against A1, the various dying declarations and the medical evidence 
were put to the accused. We had, in the very same context in Criminal 
Appeal No.860 of 2026, Sanjay Kumar & Anr. v. State of Bihar & 
Ors. dated 12.02.2026 (authored by one of us, Sanjay Kumar, J.) 
with respect to the scanty questioning under Section 313, Cr. PC 
without putting all the incriminating circumstances to the accused, 
held as under:- 
“Needless to state, the afore stated casual examination of 
the accused falls woefully short of the required standard, 
as stipulated by law. This Court has emphasized this point, 
time and again. We may refer to the recent judgment of this 
Court on this point in “Ashok vs. State of Uttar Pradesh” 
(2025) 2 SCC 385. Therein, a 3-Judge Bench of this Court 
observed that it is the duty of the public prosecutor to assist 
the trial court in recording the statement of the accused 
under Section 313 of the Code; if the court omits to put 
any material circumstances brought on record against 
the accused, the public prosecutor must bring it to the 
notice of the court while the examination of the accused 
is being recorded; he must assist the court in framing the 

574
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
questions to be put to the accused; and as it is the duty of 
the public prosecutor to ensure that those who are guilty of 
the commission of offence must be punished, it is also his 
duty to ensure that there are no infirmities in the conduct 
of the trial, which will cause prejudice to the accused. 
We may also note the earlier decision of another 3-Judge 
Bench of this Court in “Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade vs. 
State of Maharashtra” (1973) 2 SCC 793 , wherein the 
in pari materia provision in the erstwhile Code was under 
consideration and it was observed that great care is 
expected of Sessions Judges, who try grave cases to 
collect every incriminating circumstance and put it to the 
accused even though at the end of the long trial, the judge 
may be a little fagged out. 
In the light of the aforestated settled legal principle, we 
are of the opinion that incurable injustice was done to 
the appellants in the course of their examination under 
Sections 313 of the Code, as no specific questions were 
put to them apropos each piece of incriminating evidence 
adduced against them. The judgments of the trial court 
based on such inadequate examination of the accused, 
therefore, cannot be sustained.
In the cited case, we had remanded the matter and restored it to 
the files for resuming the trial from the stage of questioning under 
Section 313, Cr.P.C. However, in this case, we do not think such a 
measure is warranted, especially when the evidence falls short of the 
standard required in a criminal trial which is not a mere suspicion, 
a ‘maybe true’ but a ‘must be true’, evidently a long distance to 
travel, the whole of this distance being paved with legal, reliable 
and unimpeachable evidence resulting in a finding of guilt beyond 
all reasonable doubt, as held in Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab10.
31.	 We have found that the investigation carried out is grossly deficient. 
The scene mahazar was not drawn up, no forensic examination was 
carried out at the scene of crime and no independent witnesses were 
arrayed. The causation of fire not investigated, the presence of the 
10	
AIR 1957 SC 637

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
575
Sanjay Kumar Sharma v. State of Bihar & Ors.
accused in the vicinity of the crime scene not established. The delay 
in registration of FIR despite the information having been received at 
the police station earlier, and the police personnel including the I.O 
having visited the scene of occurrence where a number of villagers 
were present was a serious lapse. The delay caused and the manner 
in which the FIS was recorded in the present case throws suspicion 
on the very conduct of the I.O. The dying declarations should 
have been recorded with more caution and when taken inside the 
hospital it should have ideally been recorded in the presence of a 
Doctor, whose certification also ought to have been obtained. The 
incriminating circumstances that come out in a trial are to be put to 
the accused in its entirety, a solemn duty enjoined both on the Court 
and the Prosecutor equally, failing which the entire prosecution may 
fail for that sole reason. We reiterate these aspects only to point 
out the lapses in investigation, which could have been avoided, to 
provide some guidance at least in the future. 
32.	 A couple, at the fag end of their lives were burnt to death and the 
cause, whether it’s a homicide or accidental death, eludes civil society 
and throws a pall of suspicion on their own son and his family, who 
will always carry the yoke of dishonour. The son and daughter-in-
law were accused of parricide and were convicted by the trial court, 
later acquitted by the High Court, which acquittal is now affirmed by 
us. The trauma of arrest, incarceration and trial will always scar the 
couple and more so their children who were left orphaned, during 
the time when their parents were imprisoned. We cannot but caution 
the investigators and the Courts to strive to do better and follow 
accepted practises and procedural rules to the hilt, when lives are 
lost or taken and there is a possibility of false accusations being 
made, putting to peril the reputations of the living.
33.	 The appeal is dismissed. 
34.	 Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
