[2026] 3 S.C.R. 493 : 2026 INSC 213
Pannalal Bhansali
v.
Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 7655 of 2025)
10 March 2026
[Sanjay Kumar and K. Vinod Chandran,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the reduction of share capital u/s.66 of the 
Companies Act, 2013, and the consequent forced exit of minority 
shareholders, was arbitrary and unfair.
Headnotes†
Companies Act, 2013 – s.66 – Reduction of share capital – 
Appellants-minority public shareholders in the respondent 
company, held a fraction of 1.09% of shares – Respondent 
no.1 decided to reduce its share capital u/s.66, by cancelling 
28,457,840 equity shares held by the minority shareholders and 
paying them an exit price of Rs.163.25 per share which was 
subsequently raised to Rs.196.80 per share by the NCLT – Said 
reduction approved by 99.9% of total shareholders – Minority 
shareholders including appellants filed appeal challenging the 
same on the ground that the explanatory note of the General 
Meeting was a tricky notice to mislead them because it did 
not include the actual valuation reports, and valuation was 
done by an internal auditor – Correctness:
Held: Notice not vitiated by non-disclosure or mis-disclosure merely 
for reason of the valuation and fairness report not being placed 
before the shareholders as there was no statutory mandate for a 
valuation report for the reduction of a share capital – Valuation in the 
process of reduction of capital was resorted to by the company only 
to arrive at a fair value and the fair value arrived, after the deduction 
of tax was disclosed in the notice and the method adopted itself 
was kept open for verification by the identified shareholders at the 
registered office – It was disclosed fully in the proceedings before the 
NCLT where the investors objected, despite the special resolution 
having been passed with a thumping majority – Reduction of share 
capital can be achieved by a special resolution and confirmation 
* Author

494
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
by the tribunal, without a report of valuation from an approved/
registered valuer and hence, it does not fall within the ambit of a 
relevant material; without the full and complete disclosure of which 
the reduction of capital cannot be acted upon – However, company 
despite any legal requirement adopted a valuation exercise, which 
was further affirmed in a fairness evaluation by a different agency, 
both of which reports were retained in the Registered Office of the 
Company, kept open for verification by the investors – Thus, no 
procedural infraction or misleading disclosure to style the notice 
as ‘tricky notice’ – Notice contains the full disclosure as required 
in a measure employed for reduction of share capital u/s.66, which 
is the price offered by the company which translates as an exit 
option for the identified shareholder – Furthermore, appointment 
as an internal auditor, does not bring in a bias with respect to 
the activities of the company which would essentially go against 
the scope and spirit of an audit carried out of the accounts of 
the company as an inhouse verification, which is also a statutory 
requirement, available for scrutiny before a statutory auditor – 
Not even a probability found that the internal auditor would act 
in a biased manner, leave alone the valuation agency which is 
an affiliate of the former – Plea that arbitrarily and without legal 
sanction, the method of Discount for Lack of Marketability-DLOM 
was applied to further reduce the value of share, cannot be 
accepted – Applicability of DLOM cannot be held invalid and in 
any event, what has to be looked at by the tribunal in scrutinising 
the scheme of reduction of capital is only as to whether there was 
a fair measure employed which cannot be termed unreasonable 
or prejudicial to the individual shareholders – Fair and reasonable 
value was offered to the minority shareholders and the majority 
of the identified shareholders present and voting, voted in favour 
of the resolution – Even on a microscopic scrutiny the valuation 
cannot be found to be egregiously wrong especially looking at the 
previous offers and also the rights issue offered at par, prior to 
the reduction of share capital, exponentially increasing the take 
aways of the individual shareholders and the valuation cannot at 
all be said to have gone off-track, so as to make it egregiously 
wrong – Appellants were seasoned retail investors who made a 
calculated decision – Valuation is an exercise best left to experts, 
and the Court found no blatant unfairness – Furthermore, plea as 
regards the jurisdictional defect on the composition of the NCLAT 
and the status-quo order cannot be accepted. [Paras 29, 32, 34, 
38, 46, 48, 50]

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
495
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
Companies Act, 2013 – s.66 – Reduction of share capital – 
Requirements – Explained. [Para 47]
Case Law Cited
Union of India v. Madras Bar Association [2010] 6 SCR 857 : (2010) 
11 SCC 1; Madras Bar Association v. Union of India [2015] 6 SCR 
638 : (2015) 8 SCC 583; State of M.P. v. B.R. Thakare (2002) 
10 SCC 338; State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar [1952] 1 
SCR 284 : AIR 1952 SC 75; LIC v. Escorts Ltd and Others [1985] 
Supp. 3 SCR 909 : (1986) 1 SCC 264; Claude-Lila Parulekar 
(SMT.) v. Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. and Others [2005] 2 SCR 1063 : 
(2005) 11 SCC 73; Devas Multimedia (P) Ltd. v. Antrix Corpn. Ltd. 
[2022] 11 SCR 291 : (2023) 1 SCC 216; N.K. Bajpai v. Union of 
India [2012] 2 SCR 433 : (2012) 4 SCC 653; Mihir H. Mafatlal v. 
Mafatlal Industries Ltd. [1996] Supp. 6 SCR 1 : (1997) 1 SCC 
579 – referred to.
In Re: Reckitt Benckiser (India) Ltd., 2005 SCC OnLine Del 674; 
In Re: Cadbury India Limited, 2014 SCC OnLine Bom 4934; 
Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co. v. Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. 
(1971) Comp. Cases 377 (Bom.) – referred to.
British and American Trustee and Finance Corporation v. Couper 
(1894) SC 399; Kiri Industries Ltd. v. Senda International Capital 
Ltd. [2022] SGCA (I) 5; Baillie v. Oriental Telephone and Electric 
Co. Ltd. [1915] 1 Ch 503; Foss v. Harbottle, 67 E.R. 189; Kaye v. 
Croydon Tramways & Co. Ltd. [1898] 1 Ch. 358; Thio Syn Kym 
Wendy and Others v. Thio Syn Pyn and Others [2018] SGHC 54; 
Liew Kit Fah and Others v. Koh Keng Chew and Others [2020] 1 
SLR 275 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
“Shareholder Oppression and ‘Fair Value’: of Discounts, Dates and 
Dastardly Deeds in Close Corporation” by Professor Douglas Moll 
(2004) 54 (2) Duke LJ 293 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Companies Act, 2013; Companies (Accounts) 
Rules, 2014; Special Court (Trial of Offences relating to Transactions 
in Securities) Act, 1992; Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.

496
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
List of Keywords
Buy-back offer; Discount for Lack of Marketability (DLOM); Fair 
market value; Fair value; Fairness report; Indian Accounting 
Standards; Internal auditor; Minority shareholders; Oppression and 
mismanagement; Reduction of share capital; Special Resolution; 
Tricky notice; Valuation report.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 7655 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 03.04.2025 of the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal in CAAT No. 340 of 2019.
With
Civil Appeal No(s). 9862, 9601, 9797, 7666, 9478, 9599, 9849, 
and 13824 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
K. Parameshwar, Sr. Adv., Masoom K. Shah, Udit Gupta, Ms. Veda 
Singh, Prasad Hegde, N Sai Kaushal, Adit Garg, Rohan Chawla, 
Ms. Aashvi P. Shah, M/s. Udit Kishan And Associates.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Shyam Divan, Ramji Srinivasan, Percival Billimoria, Sr. Advs., 
Ms. Arti Singh, Kamal Shankar, Tanmay Sharma, Aakashdeep 
Singh Roda, Arjun Narang, Shivam Jain, Ms. Shefali Munde, Arjun 
Bhatia, Arpith Jacob Varaprasad, Ankur Singhal, Ms. Pooja Singh, 
B P Singh, Soumya Dutta, Khowaja Siddiqui, Arvind Gupta, Kshitij 
Arora, Ms. Rachita Sood, Ms. Priyamvada Paneru, Rahul Bhaskar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
1.	
The appellants, investors in a minority, cry foul on the allegation of 
their being arbitrarily disgorged of their shareholdings and eased out 
of the 1st respondent company, (BTL for brevity) in a grossly unfair 
manner, making a sham of an evaluation fixing the share price at 
an unreasonably low value. Shorn of the details, the 1st respondent, 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
497
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
a closely held company having 1.09% of its shareholding with 
individuals, decided to reduce its share capital under Section 66 of 
the Companies Act 20131 by cancelling 28,457,840 equity shares 
held by the identified minority shareholders by paying an amount of 
Rs.163.25/- per equity share of Rs.10/- each. The resolution was 
passed by a Special Resolution with a majority of more than 99.90%, 
the sanction for which was sought before the National Company Law 
Tribunal (the NCLT hereinafter). The NCLT found that the decision 
to deduct the Dividend Distribution Tax from the price fixed for the 
individual shares was arbitrary and directed the BTL to pay the 
identified individual investors; without the tax deduction, Rs.196.80/- 
per equity share. BTL acceded to the NCLT’s order but thirty-five of 
the shareholders, those who voted in favour of the reduction of share 
capital, filed appeals before the National Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal (NCLAT hereinafter), unsuccessfully, some of whom are 
before us; precisely eleven of them. The intervention attempted by 
some others were disallowed by us.
2.	
Sri. K. Parmeshwar, learned Senior Counsel led the arguments 
on behalf of appellants and forcefully urged the unfairness in the 
fixation of share value, which edged out the individual investors 
with a raw deal for the shares held for long. The Directors and the 
majority have a fiduciary relationship with not only the Company but 
also with the minority, negated totally in fixing the share prices. The 
challenge according to Sri. Parmeshwar is on three counts which 
are subtly encapsulated as the Manner, the Method and Matter, 
which he styles as the three objectionable Ms. The manner being 
the procedure followed, the method being the measure employed 
in valuation and the matter being the very low price determined. 
Insofar as the manner is concerned, it is pointed out that the Board 
resolution does not speak of a request made by the shareholders 
to give them an escape route, which is included in the notice of the 
General Meeting; misleading since such a request was absent. The 
Board peremptorily decided to reduce the shareholding and entrusted 
the valuation to the company’s own internal auditor’s associate, a 
related entity. Though a fairness report was obtained, it has the same 
date as the valuation report, indicating the hasty manner in which 
valuation and fairness evaluation were proceeded with, a clear sham. 
1	
For brevity ‘the Act of 2013

498
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
3.	
Further, there were essential aspects of valuation as revealed from 
documents, which were relevant insofar as the consideration of the 
value fixed for reduction of shareholding, which was never supplied 
to the independent shareholders, who were in a minority. Those were 
merely kept in the registered office as indicated from the notice of 
the General Meeting, which is insufficient as has been declared by 
the decisions of this Court. Despite some of the shareholders having 
asked for a copy of the valuation and fairness reports, the same were 
not supplied. There are serious procedural infractions and inadequate, 
misleading disclosures, in violation of the mandate of Section 102 
of the Act of 2013, which vitiates the entire process of reduction of 
shareholding. On a summing up of the procedural infractions, it is 
urged that the explanatory note of the General Meeting is a ‘tricky 
notice’ for : (i) it does not have a summary of or the valuation report 
itself, (ii) non-disclosure of the methodology adopted in valuation; 
reference not being made to the share value of Bharti Airtel Limited 
(BAL for brevity), a subsidiary company the shareholding in which 
is the only business of the first respondent company and (iii) the 
valuation having been made by an interested entity. The ‘tricky notice’ 
disabled an informed decision by the individual shareholders, is the 
contention, fortified with decisions. This encompasses the challenge 
to the manner in which the procedure was carried out.
4.	
Insofar as the methodology is concerned, it is argued that the BTL, 
earlier listed in the Stock Exchanges was delisted between 1999-2000 
and BAL was incorporated as a subsidiary. On the BAL launching an 
IPO in January 2002, it was listed on the Bombay Stock Exchange 
and the majority shareholding of the first respondent in BAL fell 
considerably, making BAL & BTL associate companies. It was by a 
rights issue brought out in the year 2016 and the resultant capital 
increase in BTL, BAL again became a subsidiary of BTL. Since, the 
BTL’s only business was the investment made in BAL, the share 
price fixed of BTL should have been fixed with reference to the 
share value of BAL. The valuation report indicates the share value 
of BAL at Rs.368.22/- as it’s listed price while the value of BTL was 
calculated based on the market value of BAL and the Net Asset Value 
of BTL. More importantly, arbitrarily and without legal sanction, the 
method of Discount for Lack of Marketability (DLOM) was applied 
to further reduce the value of share. The method of DLOM applied 
is against the accepted norms of valuation as has been deprecated 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
499
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
internationally too, as revealed from the judgment of the Court of 
Appeal of Singapore in Kiri Industries Ltd. v. Senda International 
Capital Ltd.2 The reliance on Professor Aswath Damodaran’s opinion 
also is not relevant, since it applies to valuation of private companies 
plagued with illiquidity. The method applied hence is arbitrary and 
unfair is the contention.
5.	
Insofar as the material irregularity, the price fixation is argued to 
be wholly deficient and arbitrarily low. It is argued that in the year 
2001, the first respondent had offered an exit price of Rs.96/- per 
share and later in the year 2006 @ Rs.400/- per share. There was 
a private offer by a commodity broker in the year 2007 @ Rs.2000/- 
per share. Reliance is also placed on the various purchase offers, 
as produced at Annexure 2 series, in the Convenience Compilation. 
It is based on the capital infusion of the rights issue that the first 
respondent again rose to the position of a holding company of BAL 
and in the year 2018 for the induction of a foreign entity, an estimate 
of fare share value was made by a qualified agency, which put 
the per share price @ Rs.310/- as is evident from Annexure A5. It 
is at this price SingTel purchased 49% of the shares in BTL. The 
reduction of the share capital then made was intended at edging 
out the investors from amongst the public, who were in a minority, 
in which circumstance there should have been a higher standard of 
fairness and transparency applied. 
6.	
The reference to market value is no basis since the investors had 
remained in the company for long, admittedly even without payment 
of dividends. A fair value for their exit from the company cannot 
be equated with the fair market value. The several offers made for 
buy-back and purchase at a higher value and the value at which 
SingTel purchased shares in the BTL, almost simultaneous to the 
reduction in share capital would definitely regulate valuation under 
Section 66. Reference is also made to Section 68 and Section 230 
of the Act of 2013, respectively of a voluntary exit and one based 
on compromise which procedure ought to have been applied to 
bring in the standard of fairness even under Section 66, which is 
an involuntary purchase made by the majority in oppression of the 
minority shareholders; a forced exit. The material defect is the low 
2	
[2022] SGCA (I) 5

500
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
value of the share fixed for the exit of the minority shareholders. Sri. 
Parmeshwar while summing up cautions that we would be laying 
down the law with respect to edging out of minority shareholders, 
which necessarily has to satisfy the judicial conscience with a higher 
standard of fairness than applicable in a voluntary or optional exit or 
an exit by compromise, especially since it is the majority will running 
roughshod over the minority rights.
7.	
Sri. Masoom K. Shah, learned counsel appearing in one of the 
appeals, for the appellant while adopting the submissions of Sri. 
Parmeshwar, points out a defect in the constitution of the NCLAT 
insofar as it being comprised of two Technical Members and one 
Judicial Member. Reliance is placed on Union of India v. Madras 
Bar Association3 (2010-MBA) (paragraph 120 (xii)) to contend that a 
Constitution Bench of this Court deprecated the practice of a majority 
of Technical Members sitting in a Bench of the NCLT or the NCLAT, 
which substitutes the High Court. In anticipation, to preempt that 
contention, it is pointed out that there cannot be raised a ground of 
acquiescence, insofar as the defect going to the root of jurisdiction 
by reason of the illegal composition, as has been held in State of 
M.P. v. B.R. Thakare4. Sri Shah also points out from the valuation 
report and the documents pertaining to various associates of the 
agency which carried out the valuation that it has an inextricable link 
and connection with the Internal Auditor of BTL. The one who signed 
the valuation report itself is in the Board of the internal auditor, thus, 
throwing a cloud of absence of impartiality on the valuer, coupled with 
a bias in favour of the majority shareholders revealing a collusion 
in arriving at a lower value of shares for the exit of the individual 
members from the public; which does not augur well on the facts of 
the case especially on the minority shareholders being given a raw 
deal and forced out of their shareholding.
8.	
Sri Sumit Kumar, learned counsel appearing for one of the appellants 
refers to Annexure A7 in C.A. No.2864 of 2021, wherein there was a 
status quo order, which is even now in force; and reduction of share 
capital having been made in the interregnum, falling flat, requiring 
immediate resumption of shares. The valuation made by the Custodian 
also is pointed out to assail the price fixed now.
3	
(2010) 11 SCC 1
4	
(2002) 10 SCC 338

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
501
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
9.	
Sri Ramji Srinivasan & Sri. Shyam Divan learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for BTL commenced their arguments with Section 423 
of the Act, which jurisdiction the appellants have invoked, wherein 
there should be a clear question of law raised, which is absent in 
the present case. Every legal requirement has been complied with 
for the reduction of share capital under Section 66 of the Act of 2013 
and there is no violation complained of but for a mere allegation of 
prejudice which the appellants have failed to substantiate as real and 
compelling, enabling this Court to interfere. Valuation is dependent 
on multiple factors and not possible of mathematical certainty. It is 
urged that in the formation of companies, the shareholders come 
together and enter into a contract or charter as revealed from the 
Articles of Association to which each of them are bound. The decisions 
are of the majority of such shareholders, failing which there would 
be mayhem and no corporate entity would be able to perform its 
functions and arrive at its collective goal of realizing its objectives. 
In the present case, it is pointed out that the appellants, eleven 
in number and those before the NCLAT, thirty-five in number do 
not together satisfy the definition of a minority as coming out from 
Section 244 of the Act of 2013. Neither do they have the number 
of shareholders, nor do their total value of shareholding satisfy the 
minimum requirement thereunder of a minimum 100 persons or 1/10th 
of the share value, thus disabling even an application for oppression 
or mismanagement on their combined efforts.
10.	 It is pointed out that there is no valuation provided under Section 66 
as would be the requirement under various other provisions of the 
Act of 2013 which demolishes the ground of an interested valuation 
having been taken up by a related agency of the internal auditor of 
the company. Even otherwise on that sole ground prejudice cannot 
be found unless it is shown in reality. Section 66 does not require 
a valuation and the safeguards as provided therein of a special 
resolution being passed in the General Meeting of the Company and 
more importantly confirmation by the Tribunal have been scrupulously 
followed. Though, a valuation is not mandated as per the Section, 
definitely there should be some method by which a fair value is 
arrived at insofar as providing an exit for the identified shareholders. 
A Valuer was appointed who is an agency, with its associates, having 
a global presence and a reputation in corporate matters including 

502
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
financial aspects. When the company could have done the valuation 
by itself, then thought it fit to appoint an independent valuer only to 
ensure transparency and to avoid a contention of bias being raised. 
The valuer had examined the books of accounts and submitted the 
valuation report, which was scrutinized by another agency who had 
also affirmed the valuation as fair and reasonable by its fairness report.
11.	 The fact that the valuer was a sister concern of BTL’s Internal Auditor 
does not bring forth any conflict of interest or validate the contention 
of lack of independence. The Internal Auditor as is mandated by 
the guidelines issued by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of 
India (ICAI) is an independent agency appointed by the Company 
for the purpose of carrying out audit, as per the mandate of the Act 
of 2013. The mere fact that the signatory of the report valuing the 
shares of BTL was in the Board of Directors of BTL’s Internal Auditor 
does not create any conflict or relation insofar as the affairs of BTL. 
The Internal Auditor acts as an independent agency and so did the 
valuer on accepted accounting norms. It is reiterated that the same 
was affirmed by an independent agency and it also was affirmed as 
a fair and true valuation by two other agencies having no connection 
with BTL or the Internal Auditor as was sought for by the Custodian 
who is a party in Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2021. The valuation and 
fairness report being on the same date only denotes the day of 
issuance and is no reflection of the time taken for evaluation.
12.	 On facts it is pointed out that BTL having been delisted from all stock 
exchanges made a buy-back offer of Rs.96/- per share in the year 
2001, which was the only buy-back offered by the company itself. 
One of the promoters of BTL, Bharti Overseas Trading Company had 
offered Rs.400/- per share in May 2006. But for that there is nothing 
substantial brought out from the various documents produced as to 
a clear value of the share of BTL, whose only investment was in 
BAL. In 2016, there was a rights issue which increased the share 
base exponentially causing significant lowering of the monetary 
value of the shares. This was followed up with a preferential 
allotment of shares at the rate of Rs.310/- per share in favour of a 
Strategic Long-Term Promoter, SingTel, so as to infuse funds into 
the company. The share value for the said transaction was on the 
basis of the prevailing market price of BAL and in accordance with 
the applicable FEMA regulations mandating a certain floor price. In 
any event, there can be no equation of the share price determined for 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
503
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
preferential allotment to the present reduction of shares. Therein the 
investors were entering into a strategic partnership in the business 
which definitely would have required a premium to be paid on the 
share value. It is also pointed out that BAL share value fell sharply 
from January 2018 to May 2018 due to the tariffs imposed and the 
fierce competition in the telecom market, which also impacted the 
share value of BTL. There is no misrepresentation insofar as the 
shareholders having requested for a buyback, which is evident from 
the Minutes of the various AGMs, some of which were handed over 
across the Bar. The shares having been delisted and there being 
no payment of dividend for long coupled with a constant clamor for 
buy-back the reduction of share capital was proposed, by which 
measure the Company out of its own funds, would purchase the 
shares of the identified shareholders which had no marketability. 
13.	 We were taken through the valuation report, figure by figure and 
page by page pointing out the manner in which the valuation was 
arrived at and the DLOM applied at the rate of 25%, at the minimum, 
for reason of the existing illiquidity, approved by Indian Accounting 
Standards as brought out in the ICAI Valuation Standards. The 
valuation as earlier pointed out was approved in the fairness report 
issued by a totally different agency. The same was placed in the Board 
of Directors and a resolution was passed subject to the approval 
of the shareholders for which notice was issued as per Annexure 
A18. The notice specifically indicated the relevant documents having 
been kept in the Registered Corporate Offices of BTL, available for 
inspection between 19.06.2018; the date of notice and 26.07.2018; 
the last day of receipt of postal ballot or e-voting. It is emphasized 
that there can be no case raised of the relevant documents having 
not been supplied, especially since the voting period extended over a 
month and in fact the Advocate of one of the investors had inspected 
the documents and sought for further details as is evident from the 
e-mail projected by the appellants themselves. It is emphatically 
contended that 99.90% of the equity shareholders of BTL passed 
and approved a special resolution and 76.35% of the identified 
shareholders present and voting also voted in favour of the special 
resolution approving the share value of Rs.196.80/-. No Objection 
Certificates were also received from all the creditors and hence, 
the petition under Section 66 of the Act seeking confirmation of the 
scheme of capital reduction before the NCLT.

504
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
14.	 The NCLT as is the mandate, called for a report from the Regional 
Director of the Department who confirmed compliance of the 
procedure prescribed under the Act for reduction of capital. The 
NCLT having confirmed the capital reduction after looking at the 
objections filed by public shareholders, the NCLAT has also approved 
the same. There is hence no scope for interference, especially since 
no prejudice is shown. It is pointed out that the capital reduction 
was proceeded with immediately after the rights issue which put the 
identified shareholders in a position enhancing their shareholding 
exponentially, especially since the rights issue offered 115 shares at 
par for Rs.10/-, as against every single share held by an investor. 
Hence, the capital reduction after the rights issue put the investors 
in a very favorable position and the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 
7655 of 2025 who would have obtained Rs.16 lakhs before the rights 
issue, on the very same valuation went home with an astronomical 
amount of Rs.47.30 crores. The fair value cannot be fixed at the 
ipse dixit of the investor, and it has to be with reference to the 
market value. There cannot be a fair value fixed divorced from the 
market value, especially in the case of BTL which had no other 
commercial activity other than the investment in BAL. The shares 
of BAL were listed in the stock market, and the value therein could 
not have been adopted for BTL which was the holding company, 
having only investment in the listed company; the shareholdings 
of which holding company was not marketable by reason of the 
delisting. It is pointed out that the identified investors are neither 
fly-by-night operators nor persons unfamiliar to investor domains but 
are shrewd operators who have earned substantial payouts; though 
not by way of periodic dividends which were practically absent, in 
the reduction of share capital, despite their shares being locked in 
for long. They have waited patiently and benefited with bountiful 
yields and crave more on an impulsive caprice, with nothing more 
and in total absence of any real prejudice having been shown to 
have visited them. 
15.	 Both sides have placed reliance on a host of decisions to buttress 
their contentions which we shall refer to, as are applicable, in the 
course of our adjudication. We also refer from the documents in the 
Convenience Compilation and otherwise from the specified volumes 
of the numbered appeals. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
505
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
Jurisdictional defect on the composition of the NCLAT & the 
status-quo order:
16.	 The contention first taken is of the constitution of the Bench of the 
NCLAT running foul of the mandate declared in 2010-MBA3. The 
Constitution Bench in 2010-MBA3 considered the challenge against 
the Companies (Second Amendment) Act, 2002, constituting the 
NCLT & NCLAT; pointedly for our purpose, with reference to Section 
10-FL insofar as the constitution of Benches. Paragraph 120(xii), 
one of the several corrections suggested, required two members of 
the Tribunal to always have a Judicial Member and any Larger or 
Special Benches constituted to have more Judicial Members than 
Technical Members.
17.	 Section 10-FL by sub-section (1) provided for the Tribunal to exercise 
the powers conferred by Benches constituted by the President out 
of which one shall be a Judicial Member and another a Technical 
Member. The first proviso empowered the President of the Tribunal by 
general or special order to permit Members to sit single and exercise 
the jurisdictional powers and authorities of the Tribunal with respect 
to such class of cases or matters with respect to a class of cases, 
as specified. The above provision is no more applicable since the 
Companies Act, 1956 has been replaced by the Companies Act, 
2013. Sections 418A and 419 of the new statute speak of Benches 
of the NCLAT and that of the NCLT. The proviso to sub-section (1) 
of Section 418A requires a Bench of the NCLAT to have at least 
one Judicial Member and one Technical Member and the proviso 
to Section 419(3) mandates a similar composition in constitution 
of Benches of two Members. Section 419 further provides that the 
Tribunal shall exercise the powers in respect of such class of cases 
or such matters pertaining to a class of cases as the President by 
general or special order specifies, by a Bench consisting of a Single 
Judicial Member.
18.	 The provisions leading to the constitution of the NCLT and NCLAT 
were again challenged in Madras Bar Association v. Union of India5 
(2015-MBA). Section 419, as we see from the law reports, was not 
challenged before the Constitution Bench and Section 418A came to 
be introduced by Act 29 of 2020, later to the decision. Three issues 
5	
(2015) 8 SCC 583

506
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
arose in the 2015-MBA5, which were with respect to (i) the constitution 
of NCLT and NCLAT, held to be valid; (ii) qualification of President 
and the Members of NCLT and NCLAT, Section 409(3)(a) & (e) as 
also Section 411(3) held invalid as making eligible a person other 
than a Secretary or Additional Secretary to be a Technical Member 
and (iii) the constitution of the Selection Committee for Members; 
held to be possible if comprising of only four Members, two from the 
Judicial side being the Chief Justice of India or his nominee and a 
Senior Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High 
Court and two Secretaries, one from the Ministry of Finance and 
Company Affairs and the other from the Ministry of Law and Justice, 
with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee having a casting vote; 
following the earlier judgment. Thus, ensuring that the Judiciary 
has the final say, untrammeled by any governmental influence or 
interference in the appointment of a Member of the Tribunal, be it a 
Judicial Member or a Technical Member.
19.	 The provisions as of now do not require a majority of Judicial Members 
in the Larger Benches of the NCLT or the NCLAT. We cannot but 
notice the extract made in 2010-MBA3 from State of West Bengal v. 
Anwar Ali Sarkar6 in the context of Article 14, applies equally to 
the issue raised before us, attempting a distinction drawn between 
judicial members and technical members. The extract was made 
consequent to the finding in paragraph 102 that “The fundamental 
right to equality before law and equal protection of laws guaranteed 
by Article 14 of the Constitution, clearly includes a right to have 
the persons rights adjudicated by a forum which exercises judicial 
power in an impartial and independent manner, consistent with the 
recognized principles of adjudication” (sic). Anwar Ali Sarkar6 held 
that even a criminal is entitled to set up a defense, and a special 
trial, as was contemplated in the legislation under challenge though 
is in public interest, would interfere with his fundamental rights.
20.	 Examining the special law contrasted with the ordinary law of the 
land, Vivian Bose J. in paragraph 87; Anwar Ali Sarkar6 opined 
that the test is not merely academic, for equality should be tested 
on the collective conscience of a sovereign democratic republic as 
to whether substantially equal treatment would be found by ‘men of 
6	
AIR 1952 SC 75

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
507
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
resolute minds and unbiased views’. Whether these men would find 
it right or proper in a democracy of the kind we have proclaimed 
ourselves, is the true test. We respectfully adopt the definition as 
applicable to adjudications in every sphere and branch involving 
interpretation and resolution of disputes, complex and simple, both. 
All adjudicators first and foremost are or should be reasonable 
persons having resolute minds and unbiased views. Though judicial 
experience is valuable, administrative officers and technocrats; to 
whom judicious consideration is not alien in their long tenures of 
service dealing also with quasi-judicial matters, statutory appeals 
and the like, when permitted by the legislature to be included as 
Tribunal Members to aid, assist and promote a holistic adjudication 
of disputes and interpretation of laws, having administrative and 
technical ramifications, we cannot after permitting them to sit side-
by-side treat them or their capabilities, with disdain or label them 
lower in status or in quality.
21.	 In the present case, we also have to notice that the Bench was 
headed by a Judicial Member and had two Technical Members, and 
the opinion was unanimous at the NCLAT. We also find no parallel 
infirmity as arising from B.R. Thakare4, wherein a single Member 
of the Tribunal, an Administrative Member, was tasked with the 
adjudication of a dispute relating to cadre determination involving 
interpretation of the respective rules. It was held as a measure of 
proper administration of justice that ‘… while allotting work to a Single 
Member, whether judicial or administrative, the Chairman should keep 
in mind the nature of the litigation and where questions of law and 
its interpretation are involved, they should be assigned to a Division 
Bench of which one of them is a Judicial Member’ (sic). No distinction 
was drawn with reference to the source from which the Members 
come and there is no application to the facts of the present case. 
As of now, the Companies Act permits a Single Bench to sit only in 
the NCLT and that too a Bench of a Judicial Member. The NCLAT 
as provided in Section 418A always comprises of two Members, one 
of whom is a Judicial Member or such larger composition where the 
prescription is only of the presence of a Member from the Judicial 
side and not in the majority.
22.	 We find absolutely no reason to interfere with the order on the 
question raised of the composition of the Bench of the Appellate 
Tribunal. We also notice the further contention taken based on the 

508
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
order of status quo, wherein the first respondent company was not a 
party, to only reject it immediately. Obviously, the matter arose from 
a scam in which a Custodian was appointed for the sale of assets 
of the person involved in the scam, the assets being represented 
by the legal representatives. The Custodian had proceeded to 
sell the properties belonging to the legal representatives in which 
circumstance this Court had issued a status quo order which binds 
the Custodian and not the first respondent company, who was not a 
party to that proceeding. The status quo order is only insofar as the 
preservation of the assets, which in the circumstance of a reduction 
of shareholding, as is the subject matter of the present case, would 
only have the consequence of the shareholding being converted to 
money which would be held by the Custodian, the disbursement and 
adjustment of which would depend on further orders passed by this 
Court in the pending appeal. Reference is also made to Annexure-22 
in Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2021 to contend that the undertaking 
before the Custodian to disclose the Special Courts order before 
the NCLT was not complied with. The Special Courts order or even 
this Court’s as we perceive it has no bearing on the share capital 
reduction of BTL. What assumes relevance is the custody of certain 
shares being with the Custodian, in which circumstance the proceeds 
with respect to that, on reduction of share capital, will have to be 
submitted to the Custodian. It does not have any significance to 
the reduction of share capital or the proceedings before the NCLT. 
The Manner; The procedural infraction:
23.	 Under this head is raised issues of; (i) a request from the shareholders, 
though disclosed in the notice having not been indicated in the Board 
Resolution; (ii) the ‘tricky notice’ issued insofar as the elements 
constituting valuation having not been disclosed, especially the 
valuation and fairness reports; (iii) the valuation having been effected 
by a related agency; (iv) the fairness report having been issued on 
the very same date of the valuation report and (v) the valuation and 
fairness reports having not been sent along with the notice and kept 
out of reach of the investors by making it open for verification only 
at the Registered Office of the Company. As was pointed out by the 
respondent company, the shares of the company remained locked 
in for long after the initial buyback offer, pursuant to delisting. There 
were also no dividends paid, in which circumstance the individual 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
509
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
investors had sought for an exit option at the Annual General Meetings 
(AGM), the minutes of which were handed over to us, across the 
Bar. That the investors herein did not opt for the buyback offer and 
had been holding the shares despite no payment of dividend for 
long is crystal clear from the minutes of the AGM. Also, it is revealed 
that there were requests made for buyback or another opportunity 
by which an exit is provided to the shareholders. That the company 
resorted to reduction in share capital, which in turn provided an exit 
option, as sanctioned under the Act of 2013 cannot also be disputed. 
24.	 Even when the request made by the individual shareholders from the 
minutes of the AGM was pointed out, there was stiff opposition by 
the appellants on the ground that they never asked for a forced exit 
from the company. Be that as it may, when it cannot be denied that 
the reduction of capital is a valid means, legally permissible under 
the Act of 2013 which is also hedged in by safeguards insofar as a 
sanction being required by a special resolution in an extraordinary 
general meeting with a further sanction by the Tribunal, wherein the 
Central Government and the Registrar of Companies is entitled to 
offer their opinions; there is little room to find a request for exit from 
the investors being necessary. The Board having decided to go in 
for a reduction in capital, which definitely is not a buyback option 
but would all the same be an exit measure, there is no infirmity 
in the notice having indicated the request made by the investors. 
Especially since the shares of the company were locked in and it was 
decided that the capital reduction process is the best possible route 
to provide an exit opportunity in a fair and transparent manner. The 
observations in the notice though not a part of the resolution would 
have weighed with the Board of Directors in arriving at a decision for 
reduction of capital by purchase of the shares held by the identified 
investors, members of the public. 
25.	 The further contention is with respect to a ‘tricky notice’ which is 
argued on the basis of reliance placed on various decisions of the 
High Courts and this Court relying on Baillie v. Oriental Telephone 
and Electric Co. Ltd.7 We would in that circumstance, look at the 
decision from the source, which coined the term ‘tricky notice’ and in 
that context a bit of the history of corporate law would be apposite. 
7	
[1915] 1 Ch 503 

510
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Foss v. Harbottle8 is a leading precedent in corporate law which 
brought in the principle of ‘proper plaintiff rule’ wherein the alleged 
wrongs against a company had to be agitated by the company 
itself. There were exceptions, subsequently carved out, by judicial 
precedents, sanctioning an individual action in the event of (i) ultra 
vires actions, (ii) a fraud on the minority, (iii) an illegal action by the 
majority and (iv) a ‘tricky notice’ without relevant material or without 
sufficient disclosure, the last of which is the contention herein. 
26.	 The term itself was coined in Kaye v. Croydon Tramways & 
Co. Ltd.9 which was concerned with an agreement between two 
companies for sale of one to the other. The company which was to 
be sold called a meeting of its shareholders by a notice issued for 
approval of the agreement. The purpose for convening the meeting 
as disclosed in the notice was to confirm the agreement of sale with 
the purchase price specified and the compensation to be paid for 
loss of office of the Directors and the Secretary. The compensation 
was based on an arrangement; in deviation of the original proposal 
to take over the Directors and the Secretary, to relieve them of their 
duties. It was found that the notice was artfully framed to mislead 
the shareholders that the entire purchase price would come to the 
selling company, making it a ‘tricky notice’, playing with words to 
mislead the shareholders to consider a contract of sale, concealing 
from them that a large portion of the purchase money would go into 
the pockets of the Directors and Secretary. 
27.	 Baillie7 was again a case in which the decision of the company was 
annulled on the ground of a ‘tricky notice’ without proper disclosure. 
Therein two special resolutions were under challenge with respect 
to enhancement of remuneration of the Directors in a subsidiary 
company, completely controlled by the holding company. The 
increased remuneration of the Directors of the subsidiary included 
20% of the net profits of that company. On an auditor’s report pointing 
out that the remuneration fixed in the subsidiary company required 
authorization by the holding company, a meeting was convened with 
three resolutions, one of which required ratification of all actions 
taken with respect to the subsidiary, including ratification of the 
8	
67 E.R. 189
9	
[1898] 1 Ch. 358

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
511
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
remuneration already paid to the Directors and the other, authorising 
the articles to be altered, bringing in sweeping changes with respect 
to the remuneration of the Directors in the subsidiary company. On a 
challenge made by the individual shareholder it was found that there 
was no disclosure of the actual amount received by the Directors 
which was alleged to be enormous and sedulously concealed. The 
notice was found to be not frank, not open, not clear and not in any 
way satisfactory, making it a ‘tricky notice’.
28.	 LIC v. Escorts Ltd and Others10 is an authority for the proposition 
that a shareholder calling an extraordinary general meeting of the 
company is not bound to disclose its reasons as is incumbent on 
the management so to do under Section 173(2) of the Companies 
Act, 1956. Claude-Lila Parulekar (SMT.) v. Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. 
and Others11 dealt with transfer of shares denying the right of pre-
emption to the existing shareholders, the appellant therein. The 
decision to raise the issued capital of the company and to allot the 
shares at par, to any person whether a member of the company or 
not was to be ratified by a General Body Meeting. The notice issued 
subsequently for an Annual General Meeting contained the details 
of ordinary and special business but no indication whatsoever of the 
increase in the share capital and allotment of shares. It was argued 
by the respondents that after the notice of AGM, the Ministry of 
Finance had given notice extending the validity of a sanction for a 
foreign exchange loan, clarifying that no further extension would be 
granted, based on which the foreign financier advised the company 
to increase its share capital in view of its expansion programme. 
This Court held that since the increase in share capital did not fall 
within the exceptions carved out in Article 94, which reflected the 
substance of Section 173 of the Act of 1956, it was incumbent for 
notice to be given not only indicating the issuance of share capital 
as a special item of business but also setting out all material facts 
relating thereto. 
29.	 We do not think that the notice in the present case is vitiated by 
non-disclosure or mis-disclosure merely for reason of the valuation 
and fairness report not being placed before the shareholders. As we 
10	
(1986) 1 SCC 264
11	
(2005) 11 SCC 73

512
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
found, the measure adopted was a reduction in capital as permitted 
by Section 66, hedged in by various protections but does not require 
a valuation report as would be required in other circumstances. A 
valuation in the process of reduction of capital was resorted to by 
the company only to arrive at a fair value and the fair value arrived, 
after the deduction of tax was disclosed in the notice and the 
method adopted itself was kept open for verification by the identified 
shareholders at the registered office. It was disclosed fully in the 
proceedings before the NCLT where the investors objected, despite 
the special resolution having been passed with a thumping majority. 
The NCLT did not reject their contentions in limine on the ground 
that they had participated in the extraordinary meeting convened and 
voted in favour of the capital reduction with a majority of 99.90% of 
the total shareholders and 76.35 % of the identified shareholders 
present and voting in favour of the resolution, but dealt with the 
contention of an unfair value having been fixed and rejected the 
same on an examination of the attendant facts and figures. We are 
quite conscious of our confined jurisdiction under Section 423 of 
the Act of 2013, which is to consider a question of law. As held in 
Devas Multimedia (P) Ltd. v. Antrix Corpn. Ltd.12 when NCLT & 
NCLAT have recorded concurrent findings it is not for this Court to 
reappreciate evidence in the usual course. However, we are obliged 
to look into the question of whether there is any perversity in the 
findings, which it is trite is one of law.
30.	 A comparison was attempted to be drawn from other provisions, 
which also are exit options available to the shareholders. Section 
62 dealing with further issuance of share capital by sub-section 
(1)(c) requires a valuation report from a registered valuer, which in 
that circumstance would have to be enclosed with the notice to the 
existing shareholders. Likewise, Section 230 of the Act of 2013 under 
Chapter XV deals with compromise, arrangement and amalgamation 
with creditors and members. When a compromise or arrangement 
is made with the creditors or the members, the provision speaks of 
two motions before the Tribunal, one to convene a meeting of the 
creditors or a class of creditors or members or a class of members 
to be held and conducted in such manner as the Tribunal directs. 
In the first motion made before the Tribunal, as is evident from 
12	
(2023) 1 SCC 216

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
513
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
sub-section (2)(v), a valuation report in respect of the shares and 
the property and all assets, tangible and intangible, movable and 
immovable of the company by a registered valuer is required to be 
annexed. If the meeting sanctions the resolution by 3/4th majority, 
then again the compromise or arrangement has to be sanctioned 
by the Tribunal by an order, for which a second motion is stipulated 
by sub-section (6). 
31.	 An amalgamation or merger as contemplated in Section 232 also 
stipulates a report of the expert with regard to valuation by sub-
section (2)(d). So does Section 236(2) in the context of a buyback 
or purchase of minority shares, which is conspicuously absent in a 
reduction of share capital, which also results in an exit of certain 
shareholders. Similarly, a buyback under Section 68 is optional and 
it is for the shareholder to decide whether the buyback is accepted 
or not, looking at the value at which the buyback is offered, which 
provision also does not stipulate a valuation report. Hence, whenever 
a valuation report was found expedient, it was statutorily required, 
but not under Section 66. 
32.	 Reduction of share capital can be achieved by a special resolution 
and confirmation by the Tribunal, without a report of valuation from 
an approved/registered valuer and hence, it does not fall within the 
ambit of a relevant material; without the full and complete disclosure 
of which the reduction of capital cannot be acted upon. However, it 
is pertinent to notice that the company despite any legal requirement 
had adopted a valuation exercise, which was further affirmed in a 
fairness evaluation by a different agency, both of which reports were 
retained in the Registered Office of the Company, kept open for 
verification by the investors. As has been factually found one of the 
investors, through his advocate had verified the reports and made 
a subsequent request only for the details of the shareholders and 
raised no dispute against the value adopted. We have to pertinently 
also notice that as argued by the learned Senior Counsel for the 
respondent, the individual investors are not fly-by-night operators, 
but are shrewd investors who are aware of the changing trends in 
businesses especially when the respondent company is only having 
the business of holding shares in a telecom company. We do not 
find any procedural infraction or misleading disclosure to style the 
notice as a ‘tricky notice’. The notice contains the full disclosure 

514
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
as required in a measure employed for reduction of share capital 
under Section 66, which is the price offered by the company which 
translates as an exit option for the identified shareholder. 
33.	 On the finding that there was no statutory mandate for a valuation 
report for the reduction of a share capital, we could reject the 
arguments raised of a related agency having been employed for 
valuation, but we proceed to consider the ground of a perceivable 
bias raised. The specific argument is that the valuer was an associate/
affiliate of the internal auditor of the company. It was buttressed by 
reference to documents, including the valuation report displaying the 
same logo, having common partners/directors and the internal auditor 
having a controlling interest in the valuer. There was a contention 
by the respondent that no allegation of mala fide or bias can be 
raised without making the entity against whom such an allegation 
is raised, a party to the lis. We are not persuaded to reject the 
contention only on that ground since here the lis was initiated by the 
company for the purpose of obtaining a confirmation of the special 
resolution, which is strictly not adversarial in nature, but in which 
the stakeholders are entitled to raise their objections and argue 
against such confirmation. Hence, when an objection is raised as 
to the independence or lack of it, of a valuer, it is for the Tribunal 
to look into it and if satisfied implead that entity or otherwise reject 
it in limine; which later procedure was adopted in the present case. 
34.	 Before us, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent 
company had produced the Basic Principles Governing Internal Audit 
which mandates that the internal auditor shall be free from undue 
influence and shall resist any undue pressure or interference in 
establishing the scope of the assignments or the manner in which 
the audit is conducted and reported. The internal auditor in the nature 
of an in-house vigilance machinery, is mandated by the Act of 2013, 
under Section 138 read with The Companies (Accounts) Rules, 
2014. Rule 13 of the said Rules by its Explanation also permits an 
employee to be appointed as an internal auditor, which in the present 
case has not been resorted to. Though, distinguished from statutory 
audits under Chapter X, the internal auditor, here an outside agency, 
merely by their appointment by the company cannot be said to be 
related in any manner to the company. Appointment as an internal 
auditor, does not bring in a bias with respect to the activities of the 
company which would essentially go against the scope and spirit of 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
515
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
an audit carried out of the accounts of the company as an in-house 
verification, which is also a statutory requirement, available for scrutiny 
before a statutory auditor. It has been held in N.K. Bajpai v. Union 
of India13 that bias should be demonstrably real and present to vitiate 
an action. Where it is shown that there exists a real danger of bias 
the action would attract judicial chastisement while, if it is only a mere 
probability or even a preponderance of probability it cannot affect 
the action adversely, was the law declared. We do not find even a 
probability that the internal auditor would act in a biased manner, 
leave alone the valuation agency which is an affiliate of the former.
35.	 We have to further notice that the fairness report has been obtained 
from a different agency which has no connection with the internal 
auditor and in any event, the valuation report is accepted as valid 
and proper by the ICICI Securities Limited and SBI Caps Securities 
Limited, totally unrelated to the respondent company as is revealed 
from Annexures A-30 & A-31 produced in Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 
2021 as obtained by ‘The Custodian, Appointed under Special Court 
(Trial of Offences relating to Transactions in Securities) Act, 1992’ 
the 2nd respondent in that appeal. All the more as per the proviso 
to Section 66(3) the Tribunal considering the reduction of capital 
measure has to obtain a certificate from the Company’s auditor that 
the accounting standards adopted is in conformity with that specified 
in Section 133, which is produced as Annexure A13 in the application 
under Section 66 before the NCLT produced as Annexure-A/14 in 
the Convenience Compilation. 
36.	 The fairness report signed on the same day as the valuation report 
does not raise any apprehension of levity since the fairness is of the 
approach in valuation, which does not require a threadbare analysis 
or a reverification of the books of accounts. The figures are more 
than explicit and so is the method adopted as discernible by financial 
experts. We also reckon the contention raised by the respondent 
company that the date of the report indicates the day of issuance and 
not necessarily the time taken or the diligence exercised in arriving 
at the valuation or even affirming the fairness. 
37.	 One other contention is of the reports being kept in the Registered 
Office not being sufficient based on Firestone Tyre & Rubber 
13	
(2012) 4 SCC 653

516
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Co. vs. Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd.14 highlighting the difficulty 
and disinclination of shareholders to travel to the Registered Office. 
We cannot subscribe to the said view at least in today’s scenario of 
ease of travel, especially since most of the 35 appellants before the 
NCLAT lived in Delhi, when the Registered Office was in Gurgaon, 
Haryana. Some had their residence at Mumbai & Pune and only 
three were abroad, as revealed from the cause title of the order of 
the NCLAT. None except one thought it fit to verify the reports. We 
hence find absolutely no reason to sustain the procedural infraction 
on the grounds of non-disclosure or bias, as alleged by the appellants. 
The Method and The Matter; DLOM and the share price:
38.	 The above aspects are considered together since they are inextricably 
linked. The share value determined for reduction of share capital is 
termed unfair solely because of the application of DLOM, which is 
said to be inapplicable in a situation of this kind where there is a 
forced exit of the shareholders. Both sides relied on Kiri Industries 
Ltd.2. On a reading of the same, we do not find any international 
denouncement of the application of DLOM in all situations, as 
argued by the appellants. True, in the aforesaid case wherein there 
was a forced buyout as per the order of the Singapore International 
Commercial Court, wherein the minority shareholders were asked 
to be bought out by the majority shareholders, DLOM was declined. 
Insofar as the DLOM principle is concerned, the decision in Thio 
Syn Kym Wendy and Others v. Thio Syn Pyn and Others15 and 
the decision in Liew Kit Fah and Others v. Koh Keng Chew and 
Others16 were referred to. Liew Kit Fah16 held that liquidity, after 
all is a valuable attribute of an investment and the lack of it is a 
depreciatory factor, giving rise to application of DLOM in the valuation 
of unquoted shares. However this was observed to be laid down 
in a consent order where there was no Court order on account of 
a finding of oppression. The principle laid down in Thio Syn Kym 
Wendy15 that DLOM will apply to illiquid privately held shares, save 
in exceptional circumstances proven by the party alleging it, was 
held to be an incidental observation which cannot be elevated into 
14	
(1971) Comp. Cases 377 (Bom.)
15	
[2018] SGHC 54
16	
[2020] 1 SLR 275

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
517
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
a principle of law. In the context of a Court ordered buyout in an 
action alleging oppression, DLOM was found to be inapplicable, not 
as a universal principle but more on the facts of that case.
39.	 Interestingly the Court referred to an article of Professor Douglas 
Moll titled “Shareholder Oppression and ‘Fair Value’: of Discounts, 
Dates and Dastardly Deeds in Close Corporation” (2004) 54 (2) 
Duke LJ 293, wherein the distinction between fair value and fair 
market value was brought out which we have read, as available on 
the internet. ‘Fair value’, as distinguished from ‘fair market value’, is 
the enterprise value; the pro-rata portion of the company’s overall 
value as an operating business. ‘Fair market value’ on the other hand 
involves the Court valuing the minority’s share by considering what 
a hypothetical purchaser would pay for them. Professor Moll was 
of the opinion that in a ‘fair market value’ situation, a marketability 
discount is applied since a hypothetical purchaser is likely to pay 
less for shares which lack a ready market. Professor Moll was also 
of the opinion that valuation is inherently contextual and buyout 
proceedings in the context of an oppression setting, would make 
the marketability discounts inappropriate. The report is an interesting 
read and affords insights in the context of an oppressive setting 
with respect to Close Corporations, in the United States of America. 
The illustrative reference to minority with a 33% shareholding in 
an oppressive setting also is distinguishable from the instant case, 
which deals with a far lesser minority and in the Indian setting. The 
statutory language was also pertinently pointed out as standing 
against a marketability discount being applied, when the specific 
term used was ‘fair value’ as distinguished from ‘fair market value’, 
employed in comparable statutes. 
40.	 It is recognised even by Prof. Moll that investors generally pay a 
premium for liquidity and conversely extract discounts for illiquidity. 
In the present case, there is no oppression complained of by the 
minority shareholders and in any event, 11 appellants do not, by their 
sheer number or with their combined holdings, constitute a collective 
which could validly raise an allegation of oppression under Section 
244 of the Act of 2013. We have to immediately also notice that the 
shareholders identified for the purpose of capital reduction, together 
far exceeded the minimum number; one hundred under Section 244. 
There was no complaint of any oppressive action existing. All the 
same in the setting of the present proceedings, even the objection 

518
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
raised by an individual shareholder as to the reasonableness of the 
price fixed has to be looked into, which pertinently is not in a setting 
of oppression. 
41.	 In Baillie7, the decision in Foss v. Harbottle8 was noticed and the 
exception carved out to the ‘proper plaintiff’ rule even while rejecting 
the challenge against the action of its Directors enabling purchase of 
the personal properties of the Directors for prices far exceeding its 
actual value that too by mortgaging and encumbering other properties 
of the company and applying these proceeds to make the purchases. 
However, it was observed that it would not be proper to hold that 
a society of private persons associated together in an undertaking, 
are deprived of their civil rights inter se, because the Crown or the 
Legislature has conferred on them a corporate character to make 
more attainable, the common objects. The ‘claims of justice’ then 
would be found superior to any difficulties arising out of technical 
rules regarding the mode in which the corporations are required to 
sue. Even in Foss v. Harbottle8 it was held that if a case arises as 
to an injury to a corporation or to some of its members, for which 
no adequate remedy remains except that of a suit by an individual 
corporator in their private character, requiring protection of those 
rights entitled in their corporate character, then the ‘claims of justice’ 
would override procedural technicalities. It is the said principle that is 
enshrined in the Act of 2013 where even when a special resolution 
is passed the Tribunal is required to scrutinise a reduction in capital 
under Section 66, after hearing all the stake holders, ex debito justitiae. 
42.	 Coming back to the present case, here the measure employed was 
of a reduction in capital as permitted by the statute. In Re: Reckitt 
Benckiser (India) Ltd.17 encapsulated the principles regulating a 
reduction of share capital after referring to British and American 
Trustee and Finance Corporation v. Couper18. The broad principles 
distilled were that (i) reduction of share capital is a strictly domestic 
concern depending on the decision of the majority, (ii) if reduction of 
share capital is approved by a special resolution, the majority also 
has the right to decide how it should be carried out, (iii) reduction 
of share capital can be brought about by extinguishing some of the 
17	
2005 SCC OnLine Del 674
18	
(1894) SC 399

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
519
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
shares while retaining others even in the same class or making a 
proportionate reduction for all or even for some, while for others it is 
totally extinguished. The reduction thus can be in any manner and 
even if it is selective it is permissible. 
43.	 The reduction of capital was sanctioned by the Board and it was put 
up as a special resolution before the general meeting convened. The 
special resolution was passed by not only the majority shareholders 
but also by 3/4th of the majority individual shareholders, present and 
voting, identified for the purpose of reduction of share capital, which 
makes it consensual. Even the appellant in C.A. No.7655 of 2025, 
who holds the majority of the minority shareholding voted in favour 
of the special resolution. An argument was raised that only 733 out 
of the 4942 identified shareholders voted and the 3/4th majority from 
those present and voting is a mirage. We cannot accept the said 
contention, first for reason of the statute not prescribing any majority 
from the identified shareholders. Then, the others thought it fit to 
abstain and in a democratic set up where the will of the majority 
reigns supreme, the abstainers are deemed to have left the choice 
to those who vote and they acquiesce to the majority will of those 
present and voting in the extraordinary general meeting. It is only 
later, finding the application of DLOM that an objection was taken. 
Thus there is no oppression setting in the present case and there 
can be no distinction drawn from the statutory words employed of 
a ‘fair value’ and a ‘fair market value’. 
44.	 The statutory scheme also does not restrict the use of DLOM. 
Examining the statutory scheme under Section 66, in addition to 
the special resolution and notice to the Central Government and 
the Registrar of Companies, sanction is accorded by the Tribunal for 
capital reduction only if it is satisfied that the accounting treatment 
proposed by the company for such reduction is in conformity with the 
accounting standards specified in Section 133 or any other provision 
of the Act and a certificate to that effect by the company’s auditor 
has been filed with the Tribunal, as per the proviso to Section 66(3); 
which we have found was furnished. Section 133 enables the Central 
Government to prescribe accounting standards as recommended 
by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India constituted under 
Section 3 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 in consultation with 
and after examination of the recommendations made by the National 
Financial Reporting Authority, constituted under Section 132 of the 

520
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Act of 2013. The Indian Accounting Standards (Ind AS) 113 provides 
for fair value determination as a market based measurement and 
not an entity specific measurement, quite contrary to the statutory 
scheme found in the United States as described by Professor Moll. 
45.	 The definition of fair value as per the Ind AS 113 is ‘the price that 
would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement 
date’(sic). It is required that when measuring fair value, an entity 
shall take into account the characteristics of the asset or liability, 
if market participants would take those characteristics into account 
when pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date. These 
characteristics include, not exhaustively, but as stated in the Ind 
AS 113, as an example, the condition and location of the asset 
and restrictions if any on the sale or use of the asset. Hence, the 
approved accounting standards, as statutorily brought out, treats 
the fair price as one linked with the market especially in the context 
of Section 66, reduction of share capital. The Valuation Standards 
Board ICAI and the ICAI Registered Valuers Organisation of the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India has brought out ‘ICAI 
Valuation Standard 103-Valuation Approaches and Methods’. The 
Discount for Lack of Marketability (DLOM) is one of the subheadings 
under the heading “Adjustment and Valuation”. It is stated therein 
that ‘DLOM is based on the premise that an asset which is readily 
marketable commands a higher value than an asset which requires 
longer period/ more efforts to be sold or an asset having restriction 
on its ability to sell.’ ‘Determining an appropriate level of DLOM can 
be a complex and subjective process. Accordingly, the specific nature 
and characteristics of the asset and the acts and circumstances 
surrounding the valuation should be considered.’
46.	 Looking at the valuation report it definitely reckoned the share value of 
BAL for a reasonable period since that would have a nexus in deciding 
the value of shares of BTL whose only business is investment in the 
listed BAL. BTL admittedly was not listed having been delisted in the 
year 1999-2000 and continued without any payment of dividend to 
the shareholders. The only buyout, which was statutorily prescribed, 
was offered at the rate of Rs.96/- per share, long back in the year 
2001. In 2006, one of the promotor firms of BTL had offered to 
purchase the shares of public shareholders at Rs.400/- per share. 
More importantly, BTL conducted a rights issue in 2016 whereby the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
521
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
existing shareholders were offered and issued 115 shares for every 
one share held by them which resulted in diminishing the monetary 
value of BTL shares. The various offers relied on in the Convenience 
Compilation, at Annexure 2, even though not authenticated, reveals 
only a price of Rs.35-Rs.55 that too before the rights issue of the 
shares. A commodity broker is said to have offered an amount of 
Rs.2000/- in the year 2007 that too, far prior to the rights issue. The 
further issue of share capital for the purpose of bringing in an investor 
as a strategic long-term promoter made a valuation at Rs.310/- per 
equity share which is not parallel with the reduction of capital now 
attempted by the respondent company. The marketability of the 
shares is absent, and it has to be reiterated that the company had 
not been paying any dividends. There were also requests made by 
the shareholders for an exit option as is revealed from the minutes 
of the AGMs. In the totality of the circumstances, the applicability 
of DLOM cannot be held invalid and in any event, what has to be 
looked at by the Tribunal in scrutinising the scheme of reduction of 
capital is only as to whether there was a fair measure employed 
which cannot be termed unreasonable or prejudicial to the individual 
shareholders. 
47.	 In Re: Reckitt Benckiser (India) Ltd.17 held that when the matter 
comes to Court, the satisfaction of the Court is as to whether (i) there 
is an unfair or inequitable transaction and (ii) whether the creditors 
entitled to object to the reduction have either consented or are paid 
or are secured. In Re: Cadbury India Limited19 examined Section 
100 of the Act of 1956; analogous to the purpose of Section 66, to 
find three requirements; (i) the Articles of Association should permit 
a reduction of share capital; (ii) the scheme for reduction should 
be approved by a special resolution and (iii) the Court’s sanction 
(sic- now the ‘Tribunal’) must be obtained if the special resolution is 
passed. The consideration of sanction of the scheme of reduction 
is regulated insofar as being (i) not against public interest; (ii) fair 
and just and not unreasonable and (iii) not unfairly discriminatory 
or prejudicial against a class of shareholders. As for prejudice it 
was held to be something more than just receiving less than what 
a particular shareholder may desire. To find prejudice there should 
be an attempt to force a class of shareholders to divest themselves 
19	
2014 SCC OnLine Bom 4934

522
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of their holding at a rate far below what is reasonable, fair and just; 
a strategy by which an entire class is forced to accept something 
that is inherently unjust. It was also held that reasonableness can 
be tested on the basis of past open offers, extinguishments or buy-
backs and the rates at which they were effected. If the rates offered 
in the scheme of reduction is more than the past offers then, the 
burden on the objector is exponentially high when raising the plea 
that the offer is unfair or unreasonable, to establish real prejudice, 
palpable bias and demonstrable arbitrariness. Allegation of violation 
of principles of fairness, when raised should be substantiated by 
obvious and blatant unfairness as revealed from the consequent 
action; which is absent here. 
48.	 Unless the valuation is especially unreasonable it would be a wrong 
approach to reject a plausible rationale provided by the valuer on 
the mere ground that the objector has a different point of view. The 
test insofar as considering a sanction as held in In Re: Cadbury 
India Limited19 is as to whether (i) a fair and reasonable value was 
offered to the minority shareholders? (ii) The majority of the non-
promoter shareholders have voted in favour of the resolution? (iii) the 
resolution read by any fair-minded and reasonable person, without 
microscopic scrutiny, finds it to be egregiously wrong offending the 
judicial conscience? (iii) the valuer has gone so off-track that the result 
of valuation return can only be wrong? We cannot but notice that all 
the above tests are satisfied in the above case. We have already 
found that a fair and reasonable value was offered to the minority 
shareholders and the majority of the identified shareholders present 
and voting, voted in favour of the resolution. Even on a microscopic 
scrutiny the valuation cannot be found to be egregiously wrong 
especially looking at the previous offers and also the rights issue 
offered at par, prior to the reduction of share capital, exponentially 
increasing the take aways of the individual shareholders and the 
valuation cannot at all be said to have gone off-track, so as to make 
it egregiously wrong.
49.	 In this context, we cannot but notice that the share value now fixed 
by the Board and approved by the majority of the shareholders 
of the company which on modification by the Tribunal stands at 
Rs.196.80/- for each equity share. Even taking the highest offer at 
Rs.2000/- by a commodity broker as claimed by the appellants, prior 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
523
Pannalal Bhansali v. Bharti Telecom Limited & Ors.
to the rights issue, as of now on a further purchase of 115 shares 
at par, expending Rs.1150/- in the rights issue, the single share 
available with the identified shareholders becomes 116 at the rate 
of Rs.196.80/-, which by no stretch of imagination or any standard 
of scrutiny adopted, can be said to be unreasonable. Arguments 
raised on the valuation initiated at the behest of the Custodian, is 
available at Annexure A-9 & A-11, both in the year 2012, based on 
the purchase offers received. The purchase offers ranged between 
Rs.550/- to Rs.3,650/-. The valuation too by SBI Caps Securities and 
ICICI Securities ranged between Rs.12,707/- to Rs.20,215/- after 
applying discounts ranging from 20% to 30%. The above valuation 
was in the year 2012, while consequent to the reduction of share 
capital, the Custodian had sought for a verification of the valuation 
conducted by the very same agencies. ICICI Securities by Annexure 
A-30 while affirming the valuation as fair specifically noticed that the 
adverse effect by reason of the huge liability created on BAL, by a 
ruling of the Supreme Court was not captured in the earlier valuation. 
They also emphatically notice that the Valuation was by a reputed 
international firm and the Fairness Report by a SEBI registered 
category-I merchant banker. SBI Caps Securities also confirmed 
the valuation by A-31. 
50.	 We cannot but reiterate that the appellants herein are not wary 
investors, cautious retirees or mere speculators, but seasoned retail 
investors who blend in equal measure prudence with quite calculation. 
The share value of BAL was in the public domain, being a listed 
company. The appellants were aware of the fact that BTL had only 
investment in BAL, which confined its operations. The appellants 
were aware and many had participated in the rights issue brought 
about and if not participated, at their peril. The shareholders were 
also aware of the price at which SingTel was brought in, as a strategic 
long-term promoter, pursuant to which the reduction of share capital 
was attempted which gave them enough material for making an 
informed and calculated decision as to whether they should opt for 
it. Far from the bullish and bearish trends that regulate the flexible 
share value of listed companies in a volatile market, the appellants 
held on to the shares of BTL; with zero listing, zero marketability, 
zero dividend payment, zero exit options also declining purchase 
offers, with the stoic resolve of a feline waiting patiently for its prey. 

524
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
The move was made when the AGM was constituted quite realising 
the price offered for each equity share, which was even minus the 
taxes payable by the company. The decision taken at the EAGM 
passing the special resolution clinches the issue. Only on finding the 
DLOM having been applied, the objections were raised despite the 
fact that at the time of EAGM the appellants were satisfied with the 
price offered. The objection is only in applying DLOM with nothing in 
substantiation as to how the price fixed is unreasonable. The identified 
shareholders voted in majority or abstained, finding the price offered 
to be reasonable and not prejudicial, which though pounced upon 
was resiled from later. The nature’s wild offers no second pounce 
at the prey nor do the hinterlands of financial wilderness and in any 
event, valuation is an exercise which is best left to the experts as 
has been held in Mihir H. Mafatlal v. Mafatlal Industries Ltd.20 
51.	 On the above reasoning, we reject the appeals. 
52.	 Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
20	
(1997) 1 SCC 579 
