[2026] 1 S.C.R. 904 : 2026 INSC 66
HT Media Limited
v.
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and 
Service Tax
(Civil Appeal No(s). 23525-23526 of 2017)
16 January 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala* and K.V. Viswanathan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the fee paid by the appellant to the personalities/speakers, 
through their booking agents, is liable to Service Tax under the 
reverse charge mechanism, more particularly under the taxable 
category of “Event Management Service” u/ss.65(40) and 65(41) 
r/w. s.65(105)(zu) respectively of Chapter V of the Finance Act.
Headnotes†
Finance Act, 1994 – s.65(105)(zu) r/w. ss.65(40) and 65(41) – 
The appellant assessee conducted annual Hindustan Times 
Leadership Summit (the Summit) – Speakers were invited from 
outside India to address the Summit – The appellant entered 
into contracts with booking agents such as the Washington 
Speakers Bureau and Harry Walker Agency to book speakers – 
Show cause notices were issued under the Finance Act inter 
alia proposing to impose Service Tax on fees paid to the 
speakers through the booking agents under the category of 
“Event Management Service” – The Commissioner vide the 
Order-in-Original dated 13.02.2014, the demand of Service 
Tax invoking the extended period of limitation u/s.73 of the 
Finance Act with interest and penalty, was confirmed – While 
the Tribunal set aside the invocation of the extended period of 
limitation, the demand under the normal period of limitation 
came to be affirmed by the Tribunal under the category of 
“Event Management Service” – Correctness:
Held: The agreements of the assessee with the agents are part 
of the record of the present appeals – A bare perusal of these 
agreements would indicate that they are in the nature of booking 
a particular speaker for the Summit – The tenor of the contracts 
* Author

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
905
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
and the declaration given by the agents clearly indicate that the 
services rendered by such agents to the assessee were in the 
nature of booking the speakers for the event to be organized by 
the assessee – The contracts were entered into with the agents 
qua each speaker laying down the modalities of his/her visit and 
consideration for the same – Such services cannot be equated with 
“event management service” which has been statutorily defined 
to mean “any service provided in relation to planning, promotion, 
organizing or presentation of any arts, entertainment, business, 
sports, marriage or any other event and includes any consultation 
provided in this regard” – The contract of the asseessee with 
the booking agents was not for “management of an event” but 
for booking of the speaker – The presence of the speaker is 
essential for the event cannot be disputed – The speaker does 
not plan, promote, organize or present the event – Thus, the 
speaker, is neither an “event manager” nor does he provide an 
“event management service” – Similarly, the booking agent who 
merely books the speaker also acts in the capacity of an agent or 
representative for agreeing to the terms of the speakers’ presence 
at the event – Participation in the event cannot be considered as 
management of the event – This precisely is the fundamental error 
committed by the revenue as well as by the Tribunal while imposing 
Service Tax on the service in question under the category of “event 
management service” – Even if this test of interpretation of sales 
tax statutes is applied for interpreting the clause for imposing 
Service Tax, the contract in question cannot be considered to be 
commonly understood as that of event management – Thus, the 
impugned judgment and order passed by the Tribunal is hereby 
set aside. [Paras 37, 39, 41, 48, 49]
Case Law Cited
Shiv Steels v. State of Assam, 2025 SCC Online SC 2006 – relied 
on.
International Merchandising Company, LLC (Earlier known as 
International Merchandising Corporation) v. Commissioner, 
Service Tax, New Delhi [2022] 8 SCR 872 : (2023) 3 SCC 641 – 
distinguished.
Bharti Cellular Limited v. Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax 	
[2024] 2 SCR 1001 : (2024) 8 SCC 608; UOI v. Future Gaming 
Solutions Private Limited [2025] 2 SCR 756 : (2025) 5 SCC 

906
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
601; Commissioner of Sales Tax v. Jaswant Singh Charan Singh 
[1967] 2 SCR 720 : 1967 SCC Online SC 154; Indo International 
Industries v. Commissioner of Sales Tax [1981] 3 SCR 294 : (1981) 
2 SCC 528 – referred to.
List of Acts
Finance Act, 1994.
List of Keywords
Service Tax; Event Management; Event Management Service; 
Event Manager; Speakers; Summit; Booking agents; Revenue 
implication; Reverse Charge Mechanism; Taxable services; Strict 
Interpretation; Common Parlance Test; Four Corners of the Statute.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 23525-
23526 of 2017
From the Judgment and Order dated 31.08.2017 of the Custom 
Excise Service Tax Appelate Tribunal in FO Nos. 56358 and 56359 
of 2017
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ashok Dhingra, Karan Bharihoke, Ms. Sonia Gupta.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
V.C. Bharathi, Gurmeet Singh Makker, S.K.singhania, P.V. 
Yogeshwaran, Annirudh Sharma II.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
1.	
Since the issues involved in both the captioned appeals are the 
same, the challenge is also to the self-same judgment passed by 
the Tribunal and the parties are also the same, those were taken up 
for hearing analogously and are being disposed of by this common 
judgment and order. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
907
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
2.	
These appeals arise from the common judgment and order passed by 
the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi 
(for short, the “CESTAT”) dated 31.08.2017 in Service Tax Appeal 
Nos. 52881 & 52888 of 2014 respectively, by which the appeals filed 
by the appellant herein came to be disposed by the Tribunal holding 
that the appellants herein are liable to pay Service Tax under the 
category of “event management service” for the period covered within 
the normal limitation. At the same time, the Tribunal also held that 
the demand of Service Tax in respect of management consultancy 
service and business support service, and interest liability for entries 
with reference to associated enterprise were not sustainable in law. 
FACTUAL MATRIX:-
3.	
The appellant assessee conducted annual Hindustan Times 
Leadership Summit (hereinafter referred to as, “the Summit”). 
Speakers were invited from outside India to address the Summit. 
The appellant entered into contracts with booking agents such as 
the Washington Speakers Bureau and Harry Walker Agency to book 
speakers such as Mr. Tony Blair, Mr. Jerry Linenger and Mr. Al Gore.
4.	
Show cause notices were issued under the Finance Act, 1994 
(hereinafter referred to as “the Finance Act”) inter alia proposing 
to impose Service Tax on fees paid to the speakers through the 
booking agents under the category of “Event Management Service” 
under Section 65(105)(zu) read with Sections 65(40) and 65(41) 
respectively of Chapter V of the Finance Act by invoking the extended 
period of limitation.
5.	
The show cause notices were adjudicated by the Commissioner and 
ultimately vide the Order-in-Original dated 13.02.2014, the demand of 
Service Tax invoking the extended period of limitation under Section 
73 of the Finance Act with interest and penalty, was confirmed. 
6.	
The appellant assessee being dissatisfied with the Order-in-Original 
passed by the Commissioner referred to above, went in appeal 
before the Tribunal. While the Tribunal set aside the invocation of the 
extended period of limitation, the demand under the normal period 
of limitation came to be affirmed by the Tribunal under the category 
of “Event Management Service”.
7.	
In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant is here before 
this Court with the present appeals. 

908
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT:-
8.	
Mr. Ashok Dhingra, the learned Counsel appearing for the appellant 
vehemently submitted that the Tribunal committed a serious error in 
passing the impugned order affirming the demand under the normal 
period of limitation. It was argued vehemently that no service could 
be said to have been provided by the agents to the appellant. 
9.	
The learned Counsel argued that there was no arrangement between 
the appellant and the agents for providing of any service for the 
Summit to the appellant. The agents, being lecture booking agents 
of the speakers, dealt with the appellant on behalf of the speakers.
10.	 It was further argued that the speakers, being senior politicians 
and former heads of States could be booked only through their 
respective agents, who negotiate & execute contracts, and collect 
an appearance fee on behalf of the speakers. The agents were paid 
by the speakers for the services rendered to the speakers, which 
fact has been confirmed by both the Washington Speakers Bureau 
and Harry Walker Agency respectively.
11.	 It was argued that for Section 65(40) and Section 65(105)(zu) of the 
Finance Act respectively to apply, an activity must have the following 
essential ingredients cumulatively to be taxable as service under 
taxable category of Event Management thereof:
(a)	 The person providing the Service must be an Event Manager, 
as defined in Section 65(41) read with the TRU Circular dated 
08.08.2002.
(b)	 Such Event Manager should be engaged in providing service 
to any person, and 
(c)	
Such service should be in relation to event management, i.e., 
planning, promotion, organizing, or presentation of any arts, 
entertainment, business, sports, marriage or any other event 
and includes any consultation provided in this regard.
12.	 The learned Counsel submitted that the TRU Circular dated 
08.08.2002 clarified that Event Manager is a person who is engaged 
in managing the venue for an event, including decoration of sets, 
mandap, chair, table, barricades, sound, light video, electricals, 
security, communication, invitations to the event/sale of tickets and 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
909
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
publicity of the event; & also has to manage stage show, artist, 
musician, choreographers & other miscellaneous items of work for 
holding of an event.
13.	 It was also argued that in the instant case the agents: 
(a)	 were neither event managers, nor were engaged in providing 
any service to the appellant. The agreements were signed by 
them as lecture booking agents of the speakers, on their behalf;
(b)	 were not engaged in managing venue, decoration of sets, 
barricades, sound, light, security, communication, sale of tickets 
or publicity;
(c)	
had nothing to do with planning, promotion, organization, or 
presentation of the Summit, and
(d)	 did not provide any consultation to the appellant qua the Summit.
14.	 In the last, it was argued that in the decision rendered in International 
Merchandising Company, LLC (Earlier known as International 
Merchandising Corporation) v. Commissioner, Service Tax, 
New Delhi reported in 2023 (3) SCC 641, this Court has held, in 
an identical fact situation, that the service falls under the category 
of Manpower Recruitment or Supply Agency Service, classifiable 
under Section 65(105)(k). Consequently, the very same service 
cannot be classified by the Revenue under Section 65(105)(zu) as 
Event Management Services.
15.	 The learned Counsel in support of his aforesaid submissions placed 
strong reliance on the following decisions:
(a) Bharti Cellular Limited v. Assistant Commissioner 
of Income Tax reported in (2024) 8 SCC 608.
(b) UOI v. Future Gaming Solutions Private Limited 
reported in (2025) 5 SCC 601.
16.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the learned Counsel prayed 
that there being merit in his appeals, those may be allowed and the 
impugned order passed by the Tribunal be set aside.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE REVENUE:
17.	 On the other hand, Mr. V. Chandrashekara Bharathi, the learned 
Counsel appearing for the Revenue would submit that the primary 

910
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
contention of the appellant that the booking agents are the agents of 
the speakers and there is no service contract between the booking 
agents and the appellant, deserves to be rejected for the following 
reasons:
(a)	 For a Principal Agent relationship to arise, it is a condition 
precedent that the booking agents represent themselves as 
the speaker’s agent to the appellant. To the contrary, in the 
contract between the appellant and Harry Walker agency, it is 
explicitly mentioned that the booking agent is an independent 
contractor and will not be responsible for the actions of the 
speaker. There was no representation whatsoever that the 
booking agent was representing the speaker in concluding the 
contract with the appellant.
(b)	 To the contrary, the booking agent would ensure that the 
speaker appears in the Summit organized by the appellant 
and is concluding the contracts in their individual capacity for 
the purpose of ensuring the speakers’ presence in the Summit.
(c)	
Merely because the agencies abroad represented themselves as 
‘booking agents’, they would not automatically become agents 
of the speakers. For such an agency to arise, the contract must 
be in such a way that the booking agents conclude the contracts 
by way of an express authorization granted by the speakers to 
the booking agents. Such an authorization is conspicuous by 
its absence in the present case.
(d)	 If the booking agents are indeed agents of the speakers as 
submitted by the appellant, there was no requirement for the 
booking agents to distance themselves from the speakers 
action, since their role will be limited to merely concluding the 
contract and will have no liability at all, since it is actually the 
speaker himself concluding the contract in the eyes of the law. 
(e)	 Lastly, the consideration that was paid by the appellant to the 
booking agent was not a payment made to the speaker directly. 
It was a payment made to the booking agent for procuring 
the speaker. Consequently, the gross amount charged by the 
booking agent would be the taxable value, on which the rate 
of Service Tax would apply.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
911
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
(f)	
As a result, on account of the lack of representation by 
the booking agents to the appellant that they were indeed 
representing the speakers while concluding the contract and 
the lack of express authorization issued by the speakers to the 
booking agents to conclude contracts on their behalf, the booking 
agents cannot be treated as mere agents of the speakers.
18.	 The Revenue further contended that the submission of the appellant 
that the contours of Section 65(105)(zu) are not satisfied deserves 
to be rejected for the following reasons:
(a)	 Any service provided or to be provided to any person by an 
event manager in relation to event management is a taxable 
supply under Section 65(105)(zu).
(b)	 An ‘event manager’ means any person who is engaged in 
providing any service in relation to event management in any 
manner, under Section 65(41).
(c)	
‘Event Management’ means any service provided in relation 
to planning, promotion, organizing or presentation of any arts, 
entertainment, business, sports, marriage or any other event 
and includes any consultation provided in this regard, under 
Section 65(40).
(d)	 In short, the appellant must satisfy the definition of the event 
manager and must provide a service in relation to the event 
management, for the charge to be successful.
(e)	 The speakers cannot be identified separately from the Summit. 
It is the speakers that constitute the Summit. There would be 
no Summit if not for the speakers’ presence. In other words, 
the speakers by themselves become the event. The role of the 
booking agents must be examined in this context.
(f)	
By ensuring the speakers’ presence for a consideration, the 
booking agents undoubtedly rendered a service in relation to the 
planning, promotion, organizing or presentation of the Summit. 
It was integral for the appellant to procure the speakers since 
without them the event would be without any significance, and 
it was the booking agents that ensured speakers’ presence. 
Consequently, the booking agents would become event 
managers and by procuring the speakers’ presence and ensuring 

912
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
that they deliver the lecture at the Summit, they have provided 
an event management service, liable to tax under Section 
65(105)(zu).
19.	 In the last, it was argued that the decision of this Court in International 
Merchandising Company LLC (supra) has no application to the 
present case. 
20.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the learned counsel prayed 
that there being no merit in the appeals those may be dismissed
ANALYSIS:-
21.	 Having heard the learned Counsel appearing for the parties and 
having gone through the material on record, the only question that 
falls for our consideration is whether the fee paid by the appellant to 
the personalities/speakers, through their booking agents, is liable to 
Service Tax under the reverse charge mechanism, more particularly 
under the taxable category of “Event Management Service” under 
Sections 65(40) and 65(41) read with Section 65(105)(zu) respectively 
of Chapter V of the Finance Act?
22.	 The aforesaid issue falls for our consideration for the period of demand 
between October, 2009 and March, 2012. The revenue implication is 
to the tune of Rs. 60,56,180/- (Rupees sixty lakh fifty-six thousand 
one hundred eighty). 
23.	 Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, 
we must look into few relevant provisions of the Finance Act. 
24.	 During the period of dispute and up to 30.06.2012, Service Tax 
was levied on various categories of taxable services defined in the 
Finance Act i.e., under the positive definition of taxable services [w.e.f. 
01.07.2012 the negative list of services regime was introduced under 
the Finance Act, where all services were taxable except services 
in the negative list or those exempted by notification issued by the 
Central Government], the relevant provisions of which are:
(a)	 Section 66 – provided for levy of Service Tax on value of 
taxable services.
(b)	 Section 66A – provided for levy of Service Tax on taxable 
services provided from outside India and received by a person 
in India under the reverse charge mechanism.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
913
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
(c)	
Various sub-Sections of Section 65 – provided definition of 
individual taxable services, which were amended from time to 
time by an amending Act, and liability to Service Tax.
(d)	 Section 65A – provided for the classification of taxable services, 
as follows:
“65A. Classification of taxable services –
(1) For the purposes of this chapter, classification 
of taxable services shall be determined according 
to the terms of the sub- clauses (105) of section 65; 
(2) When for any reason, a taxable service is prima 
facie, classifiable under two or more sub-clauses 
of clause (105) of section 65, classification shall be 
effected as follows :- 
(a) the sub-clause which provides the most specific 
description shall be preferred to sub-clauses providing 
a more general description; 
(b) composite services consisting of a combination 
of different services which cannot be classified in the 
manner specified in clause (a), shall be classified 
as if they consisted of a service which gives them 
their essential character, in so far as this criterion is 
applicable; 
(c) when a service cannot be classified in the 
manner specified in clause (a) or clause (b), it shall 
be classified under the sub-clause which occurs 
first among the sub-clauses which equally merits 
consideration;] 
4(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply 
with effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint.”
(e)	 Section 73 – provided for recovery of Service Tax not levied 
or paid or short levied or short paid or erroneously refunded.
25.	 Section 65(41) of the Finance Act defined ‘event manager’ as 
follows:

914
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“‘event manager’ means any person who is engaged in 
providing any service in relation to event management in 
any manner”
26.	 Section 65(40) of the Finance Act defined ‘event management’ as 
follows:
“‘event management’ means any service provided in 
relation to planning, promotion, organizing or presentation 
of any arts, entertainment, business, sports, marriage or 
any other event and includes any consultation provided 
in this regard”
27.	 Section 65(105)(zu) of the Finance Act, defined taxable service as 
follows:
“65. … (105) “taxable service” means any service provided 
or to be provided, -
xxx
xxx
xxx
(zu) to any person, by an event manager in relation to 
event management”
28.	 The Tax Research Unit of the Board vide Circular issued under F. 
No. B11/1/2002-TRU dated August 8, 2002 (hereinafter, the “Circular 
dated 08.08.2002”) clarified inter alia in relation to Event Management 
Service as thus:
“2. As per clause (34), “event management” means 
any service provided in relation to planning, promotion, 
organizing or presentation of any arts, entertainment, 
business, sports or any other event and includes any 
consultation provided in this regard. Vide clause (90)(zu), 
taxable service means any service provided to a client, 
by an event manager in relation to event management. 
Event manager has been defined in clause (35) as any 
person who is engaged in providing any service in relation 
to event management in any manner.
3. An event manager is hired to execute an event such 
as product launch of any corporate, promotional activities, 
concerts/ rock show, official meets, award functions, 
beauty pageants, entertainment events, exhibitions, private 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
915
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
functions, and sports events etc. Event manager uses his 
expertise and ideas to manage an event. Event manager 
is supposed to manage a venue, sets including decoration 
of sets, mandap, chair, table, barricades, sound, light 
video, electricals, security, communication, invitations to 
the event/ sale of tickets and publicity of the event. He 
has also to manage the stage show, artist, musician, 
choreographers and other miscellaneous items for holding 
of event. All services provided by the event manager are 
liable to service tax. This also covers any consultation 
provided for organizing an event....”
29.	 Section 65(68) of the Finance Act defined ‘Manpower Recruitment 
or Supply Agency Service’ as follows:
“Manpower recruitment or supply agency” means 
any person engaged in providing any service, directly 
or indirectly, in any manner for recruitment or supply of 
manpower, temporarily or otherwise, to any other person”.
30.	 Section 65(105)(k) of the Finance Act defined ‘taxable service’ as 
follows:
“65. … (105) “taxable service” means any service provided 
or to be provided,- 
(k) to any person, by a manpower recruitment or supply 
agency in relation to the recruitment or supply of manpower, 
temporarily or otherwise, in any manner; 
Explanation — For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that for the purposes of this sub-clause, 
recruitment or supply of manpower includes services 
in relation to pre-recruitment screening, verification of 
the credentials and antecedents of the candidate and 
authenticity of documents submitted by the candidate;”
31.	 Thus, the essential ingredients for levy of Service Tax during the 
Period of Dispute on any activity were:
(a)	 Such activity should be service provided in India;
(b)	 Provided by one person to another;
(c)	
For a consideration;

916
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(d)	 Such service must fall under any of the defined taxable category 
of service i.e., under the positive definition of taxable services 
under the Finance Act and made liable to Service Tax as taxable 
service under various clauses of Section 65(105). Thus, for 
levy of Service Tax, taxable category of services of the Finance 
Act under which such service is liable to Service Tax has to be 
determined and proposed in the show cause notice issued by 
the Department; and 
(e)	 In case of taxable service provided from outside India to a 
person in India, the recipient of such service is liable to Service 
Tax under the reverse charge mechanism.
SCHEME OF TAXABILITY 
32.	 For the purpose of deciding the pivotal issue, it is first necessary 
to discuss the scheme of taxability under the Finance Act during 
the relevant period. The period of dispute is from October 2009 to 
March 2012. 
33.	 It is not in dispute that during such period prior to 1.7.2012, the 
Service Tax was leviable only on the positive list of services as 
enumerated in Section 65(105) of Chapter V of the Finance Act. If 
the services strictly fall within such list, then they are taxable and if 
not, then no tax can be imposed on such services. 
34.	 The only clause of the taxable list of services which is being invoked 
by the revenue in the present case for imposing tax is Section 65(105)
(zu) of the Finance Act.
35.	 The expressions “event management” and “event manager” 
respectively occurring in Section 65(105)(zu) are defined under 
Section 65(40) and Section 65(41) of the Finance Act respectively. 
36.	 The impugned levy of Service Tax can be sustained only if the service 
in question falls within the four corners of “event management” by 
an “event manager”.
WHETHER THE PROVISION COVERS THE SERVICE IN 
QUESTION?
37.	 The agreements of the assessee with the agents are part of the record 
of the present appeals. A bare perusal of these agreements would 
indicate that they are in the nature of booking a particular speaker for the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
917
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
Summit. It provides for conditions relating to travel and accommodation 
of the speaker as well as the schedule of the speaker during his/her 
visit for the Summit. The contract also provides for the commitments 
made by the speakers. For instance, in the contract of the assessee 
with the Washington Speakers Bureau for Mr. Tony Blair, the contract 
refers to the likely duration of Mr. Blair’s speech and Question & Answer 
session. It also provides for the locations where and the duration for 
which media interaction with Mr. Blair can take place. The contract 
further briefly touches upon the topics of interaction. 
38.	 Moreover, the appellant assessee has also placed on record 
declarations from the agents that they rendered services to the 
assessee as booking agents and that the payment for appearance 
of speakers was collected by the agents under instructions and on 
behalf of the speakers in terms of the contracts with the speakers. 
39.	 The tenor of the contracts and the declaration given by the agents 
clearly indicate that the services rendered by such agents to the 
assessee were in the nature of booking the speakers for the event 
to be organized by the assessee. The contracts were entered into 
with the agents qua each speaker laying down the modalities of his/
her visit and consideration for the same. Such services cannot be 
equated with “event management service” which has been statutorily 
defined to mean “any service provided in relation to planning, 
promotion, organizing or presentation of any arts, entertainment, 
business, sports, marriage or any other event and includes any 
consultation provided in this regard”. The contract of the asseessee 
with the booking agents was not for “management of an event” but 
for booking of the speaker. 
40.	 The entire submission of the revenue focuses on the aspect as to 
whether a “principal-agent” relationship is established between the 
speaker and the booking agent. However, we are of the view that 
this is wholly irrelevant for the present controversy. The issue is not 
whether the relationship between the speaker and the booking agent 
is that of “principal-agent” or not. The issue is whether the contract 
constitutes “event management service”. As discussed hereinbefore, 
the contract is for booking of speaker and not for event management 
and therefore, the levy of tax on such contract under the category 
of “Event Management Service” should fail. 
41.	 The further argument of the revenue that, without the speaker the 
event would be devoid of any significance and therefore, the service 

918
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in question is an “Event Management Service”, also deserves to be 
rejected. That the presence of the speaker is essential for the event 
cannot be disputed. However, whether the service of the speaker or 
the agent on behalf of the speaker can be considered to be “event 
management service” is altogether a different issue. The speaker 
does not plan, promote, organize or present the event. Thus, the 
speaker, is neither an “event manager” nor does he provide an “event 
management service”. Similarly, the booking agent who merely books 
the speaker also acts in the capacity of an agent or representative 
for agreeing to the terms of the speakers’ presence at the event. 
Participation in the event cannot be considered as management of 
the event. This precisely is the fundamental error committed by the 
revenue as well as by the Tribunal while imposing Service Tax on the 
service in question under the category of “event management service”. 
PRINCIPLE OF STRICT INTERPRETATION OF TAXING STATUTE 
WELL ESTABLISHED
42.	 The principle of strict interpretation of a taxing statute, particularly 
in the context of charging provisions, is well established. We may 
refer to the recent decision in the case of Shiv Steels v. State of 
Assam reported in 2025 SCC Online SC 2006 wherein this Court 
observed as under:
“14. In construing fiscal statutes and in determining the 
liability of a subject to tax one must have regard to the 
strict letter of law. If the revenue satisfies the court that 
the case falls strictly within the provisions of the law, the 
subject can be taxed. If, on the other hand, the case is 
not covered within the four corners of the provisions of 
the taxing statute, no tax can be imposed by inference or 
by analogy or by trying to probe into the intentions of the 
legislature and by considering what was the substance 
of the matter.”
(Emphasis supplied)
CIRCULAR OF CBIC ALSO SUPPORTS THE ASSESSEE
43.	 The reliance placed by the assessee on Circular dated 8.8.2002 is 
also well founded. At the cost of repetition, we reproduce the relevant 
extract of the circular as under:

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
919
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
“3. An event manager is hired to execute an event such 
as product launch of any corporate, promotional activities, 
concerts/rock show, official meets, award functions, beauty 
pageants, entertainment events, exhibitions, private 
functions and sports events, etc. Event manager uses his 
expertise and ideas to manage an event. Event manager is 
supposed to manage a venue, sets including decoration of 
sets, mandap, chair, table, barricades, sound, light, video, 
electricals, security, communication, invitation to the event/
sale of tickets and publicity of the event. He has also to 
manage the stage show, artist, musician, choreographers 
and other miscellaneous items for holding of event. All 
services provided by the event manager are liable to 
service tax. This also covers any consultation provided 
for organizing and event…”
44.	 Thus, what is sought to be covered is the service of management 
or organizing of the event, and the revenue cannot be allowed to 
stretch the application of such a clause beyond its contours.
45.	 Having said so, we are also of the view that the classification dispute 
raised by the appellant, pursuant to the decision of this Court in 
International Merchandising Company LLC (supra), deserves to 
be rejected for the following reasons: 
(a)	 The appellant is correct insofar as the following is concerned:
(i)	
Prior to 01.07.2012, the Service Tax regime had specific 
entries for each service. In other words, without a particular 
classification, the Revenue cannot tax any service.
(ii)	
Consequently, a particular service cannot have two 
classifications and has to be traced under a specific sub-
clause of Section 65(105).
(iii)	 Since the disputed period is prior to 01.07.2012, the 
service provided by the booking agents to the appellant 
needs to be classified under a specific sub-clause. As a 
result, if the appellant succeeds on the ground that the 
service provided by the booking agents is a manpower 
supply service, as held in the aforesaid judgment of this 
Court, the Revenue cannot classify the same service as 
event management simultaneously.

920
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(b)	 Though at first glance, the facts in International Merchandising 
Company LLC (supra) seem to overlap with the present case, 
a subtle yet significant difference distinguishes the present case 
from the facts of International Merchandising.
(c)	
In International Merchandising Company LLC (supra), the 
appearance and presence of Mr. Vijay Amritraj was ensured 
by the service provided in relation to the Chennai Open, which 
was the event. He was to make appearances and participate 
in the charity opening match. What is crucial to note is that Mr. 
Amritraj had no relevance whatsoever to the main event i.e., 
Chennai Open. With or without Mr. Amritraj, the main event 
i.e., Chennai Open, would have continued without any hiccups. 
This would show that the presence of Mr. Amritraj was merely 
ancillary to the main event.
(d)	 To the contrary, in the present case, the booking agents that 
ensured the speakers’ presence directly played an integral 
role in the event itself. Without their involvement, the Summit 
conducted by the appellant would not have taken place since 
the event and the speakers cannot be separated from each 
other. The speakers and their lecture constitute the event, and 
the booking agents ensure the event takes place. As a result, 
the speakers’ presence is not ancillary to the main event.
(e)	 Consequently, the judgment in International Merchandising 
Company LLC (supra) is distinguishable from the facts of the 
present case.
LEVY FAILS EVEN ON APPLICATION OF COMMON PARLANCE 
TEST
46.	 What is stated in the circular is also the common parlance 
understanding of “event management”. The common parlance test 
has been applied by this Court for determining classification under 
sales tax statutes on various occasions. While deciding whether 
“charcoal” would be included in “coal” it was observed by this Court in 
the case of Commissioner of Sales Tax v. Jaswant Singh Charan 
Singh reported in 1967 SCC Online SC 154 as under:
“The result emerging from these decisions is that while 
construing the word “coal” in entry 1 of Part III of Schedule 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
921
HT Media Limited v.  
Principal Commissioner Delhi South Goods and Service Tax
II, the test that would be applied is what would be the 
meaning which persons dealing with coal and consumers 
purchasing it as fuel would give to that word. A sales tax 
statute, being one levying a tax on goods, must, in the 
absence of a technical term or a term of science or art, be 
presumed to have used an ordinary term as coal according 
to the meaning ascribed to it in common parlance. Viewed 
from that angle both a merchant dealing in coal and a 
consumer wanting to purchase it would regard coal not in its 
geological sense but in the sense as ordinarily understood 
and would include “charcoal” in the term “coal”.”
(Emphasis supplied)
47.	 Similarly, while deciding whether clinical syringes could be considered 
as “glassware” or not, this Court observed in the case of Indo 
International Industries v. Commissioner of Sales Tax reported 
in (1981) 2 SCC 528 as under:
“It is true that the dictionary meaning of the expression 
“glassware” is “articles made of glass” (see Webster’s 
New World Dictionary). However, in commercial sense 
glassware would never comprise articles like clinical 
syringes, thermometers, lactometers and the like which 
have specialized significance and utility. In popular or 
commercial parlance a general merchant dealing in 
“glassware” does not ordinarily deal in articles like clinical 
syringes, thermometers, lactometers, etc., which articles 
though made of glass, are normally available in medical 
stores or with the manufacturers thereof like the assessee. 
It is equally unlikely that a consumer would ask for such 
articles from a glassware shop. In popular sense when 
one talks of glassware such specialized articles like 
clinical syringes, thermometers, lactometers and the like 
do not come up to one’s mind. Applying the aforesaid 
test, therefore, we are clearly of the view that the clinical 
syringes which the assessee manufactures and sells 
cannot be considered as “glassware” falling within entry 
39 of the First Schedule to the Act.”
(Emphasis supplied) 

922
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
48.	 Even if this test of interpretation of sales tax statutes is applied for 
interpreting the clause for imposing Service Tax, the contract in 
question cannot be considered to be commonly understood as that 
of event management. The expressions ‘event management’ and 
‘event managers’ is commonly understood in the sense of appointing 
someone to manage or organize the event. Individual contract for 
booking of persons required for participation in the event are not 
commonly understood as “event management” contracts.
49.	 In the result, these appeals succeed and are hereby allowed. The 
impugned judgment and order passed by the Tribunal is hereby set 
aside. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan


