[2026] 1 S.C.R. 770 : 2026 INSC 47
The State of Uttar Pradesh
v.
Anurudh & Anr
(Criminal Appeal No. 163 of 2026)
09 January 2026
[Sanjay Karol* and Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether u/s.439, CrPC the High Court could have issued directions, 
mandating age determination test to be conducted in all cases 
involving the POCSO Act. This larger question involves twin 
considerations, one on the aspect of jurisdiction and the other on the 
aspect of law i.e., the postulate of the act regarding determination 
of age, and how the directions issued in the impugned judgement 
correspond to or are in contravention of the same.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.439 – Penal Code, 1860 – 
ss.363, 366 – Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 
2012 – ss.7 and 8 – Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) 
Act 2015 – s.94 – Allegation of the mother of victim that her 
12 year old girl was abducted from her home – Respondent 
no.1 is the accused person – Bail rejected by the trial Court – 
However, the High Court directed to constitute a medical board 
for determination of the age of the victim and then released 
the accused on interim bail – The High Court also issued 
directions mandating age determination test to be conducted 
in all cases involving the POCSO Act – Correctness:
Held: The High Court in bail jurisdiction was coram non judice 
for issuing directions mandating the investigating authorities 
within the State of Uttar Pradesh to necessarily have a medical 
examination of the victim conducted, with the particular intent to 
determine the age of the victim as also holding, that a bail Court 
would be empowered to entertain challenges to the documents 
produced to establish the age of the victim – The Court could not 
have passed directions that go against clearly stated legislative 
* Author

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
771
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
intent u/s.94 of the JJ Act – The determination of the age of the 
victim is a matter for trial, and the presumption which is accorded 
to the documents enumerated under the Section, has to be 
rebutted there, for that is the appropriate forum to do so, not the 
bail Court – If the question of age is raised at the stage of bail, it 
is only open for the Court to, from the perusal of the documents, 
take a prima facie view as to the age of the victim, not one on 
the correctness of the documents since that would amount to a 
mini trial – It could also not have fused statutory jurisdiction with 
a constitutional one, lifting one to the other, or downgrading the 
higher to the lower in order to grant itself the wherewithal, in an 
otherwise fairly circumscribed jurisdiction, to do what could not be 
done – The impugned judgment and order of the High Court is set 
aside on grounds of transgression of the jurisdiction present and 
thereby lacking the appropriate directions. [Paras 18, 19]
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.439 – Jurisdiction of the 
Court of Sessions or the High Court – Whether, in the instant 
case, the High Court erred in undertaking an exercise of issuing 
directions and getting the age of the victim examined in an 
application seeking grant of bail:
Held: A Court’s jurisdiction, i.e., either the Court of Sessions or the 
High Court u/s.439 CrPC is limited to adjudicating the question of 
the person concerned being released into society pending trial or 
whether they should continue to be incarcerated – In the instant 
case the error of jurisdiction by the High Court was in exercise of 
a statutory power and not under the Constitution – The powers 
arising from the Constitution and those flowing from a statute are 
distinct and separate – On the aspect of jurisdiction, the High Court 
had erred in undertaking such an exercise of issuing directions 
and getting the age of the victim examined in an application 
seeking grant of bail – As far as determining the age of the victim 
is concerned, it is settled that it is a matter of trial and not at the 
stage of bail – If the age is under question, the bail Court may 
examine the documents produced to establish age, but it will 
not enter into the question of those documents being correct or 
not so – The mandate of s.94 JJ Act is clear – The documents 
provided therein are to be utilized for determination of the age of 
the victim, and only in the absence thereof, will medical evidence 
be resorted. [Para 16]

772
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act 2015 – s.94 – 
Consideration of documents enumerated in s.94 – Whether 
the High Court, in the instant case, fell in error in holding 
that a Court in bail jurisdiction is empowered to entertain a 
challenge to the documents at bail stage:
Held: The consideration of the documents enumerated in s.94, 
JJ Act is a matter of consideration of evidence since it may 
involve the examination of witnesses to prove the veracity of the 
documents – That can only be done by the Trial Court – Contra 
evidence to challenge the documents, can also be presented only 
before the Trial Court – In considered view of this Court, therefore, 
the High Court fell in error in holding that a Court in bail jurisdiction 
is empowered to entertain a challenge to the documents as s.94 
would not apply at the bail stage. [Para 14.10]
Bail – Mini Trial – Impermissible at the stage of Bail:
Held: Its trite in law that a Court, at the stage of bail cannot conduct 
a mini trial – s.439 is limited to granting bail or anticipatory bail 
and requires the Court to consider only prima facie evidence, the 
risk of the accused absconding, tampering with evidence, or other 
relevant factors – Since s.439 is narrower in scope, the Court 
cannot undertake a mini trial at the bail stage. [Para 15.3]
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act 2015 – s.94 – 
Medically Determining the Age of the Victim:
Held: A medical determination of age of a victim cannot be resorted 
to as a matter of course, much less mandated – It can only be 
employed in a given circumstance when the other stipulations of 
s.94 JJ Act are not/cannot be met. [Para 17]
Constitutional Power – Statutory power – High Court – 
Distinction between Constitutional Power and Statutory power:
Held: Constitutional powers are sovereign, foundational, and 
insulated from the vicissitudes of ordinary legislation; they can 
neither be curtailed nor expanded by parliamentary enactment – 
Statutory powers, by contrast, are subordinate and mutable, 
existing at the pleasure of the Legislature, which may at any time 
amend, restrict, or repeal them through the ordinary legislative 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
773
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
process – Judicial review, while applicable to both, assumes different 
contours in each case: in relation to constitutional powers, the 
Courts examine whether their exercise conforms to constitutional 
limitations including the protection of fundamental rights and the 
inviolable tenets of the basic structure whereas, in the case of 
statutory powers, the inquiry is confined to whether the authority 
has acted within the scope and purpose of the statute from which 
its power is drawn – The constitutional power cannot overshadow 
the statutory power, enlarging its scope beyond what has been 
envisaged by the statute – In other words, while both powers rest 
with the High Court, one power cannot usurp the ambit of another, 
unless otherwise permitted by law. [Para 11.3]
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act 2015 – Protection 
of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – Difference 
between – Discussed. [Paras 14.5.1-14.5.4]
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 – 
Misrepresentation of age of victim – Law used by families 
in opposition to relationships between young people – 
Consenting adolescence – Discussed. [Para 19]
Professional Ethics – Bar – Responsibility of advocates – 
Consensual relationships between teenagers – Exercise of 
restraint, when grievance masks vengeance – Discussed. 
[Para 19]
Judicial Notice – Misuse of POCSO Act – Consideration for 
introduction of a Romeo–Juliet clause – Discussed. [Para 19]
Case Law Cited
State of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi [2005] Supp. 3 SCR 454 : (2005) 
8 SCC 21; Vaman Narain Ghiya v. State of Rajasthan [2008] 17 
SCR 369 : (2009) 2 SCC 281; RBI v. Coop. Bank Deposit A/C 
HR. Sha [2010] 9 SCR 1107 : (2010) 15 SCC 85; Just Rights for 
Children Alliance v. S. Harish [2024] 10 SCR 154 : 2024 SCC 
OnLine SC 2611; Jarnail Singh v. State of Haryana [2013] 8 SCR 
1044 : (2013) 7 SCC 263; Abuzar Hossain @ Gulam Hossain v. 
State of West Bengal [2012] 9 SCR 244 : (2012) 10 SCC 489; 
Parag Bhati (Juvenile) through Legal Guardian-Mother-Rajni 
Bhati v. State of U.P. [2016] 2 SCR 1089 : (2016) 12 SCC 744; 
Rishipal Singh Solanki v. State of U.P. [2021] 12 SCR 502 : (2022) 
8 SCC 602 – relied on.

774
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Sanjeev Kumar Gupta v. State of U.P. [2019] 9 SCR 735 : (2019) 
12 SCC 370; Mukarrab v. State of U.P. [2016] 8 SCR 557 : (2017) 
2 SCC 210; State v. M. Murugesan [2020] 2 SCR 553 : (2020) 15 
SCC 251; State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar [2011] 
15 SCR 540 : (2011) 14 SCC 770; Sangitaben Shaileshbhai 
Datanta v. State of Gujarat (2019) 14 SCC 522; Union of India v. 
Man Singh Verma [2025] 2 SCR 1534 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 
456; Mahadeo v. State of Maharashtra [2013] 17 SCR 667 : (2013) 
14 SCC 637; Union of India v. K.A. Najeeb [2021] 1 SCR 443 : 
(2021) 3 SCC 713; Amlesh Kumar v. State of Bihar [2025] 7 SCR 
394 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1326; P. Yuvaprakash v. State [2023] 
10 SCR 478 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 846; Rajni v. State of UP, 
2025 INSC 737; Rajesh Chaddha v. State of U.P [2025] 6 SCR 
382 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1094 – referred to.
Pradeep Kumar Chauhan & Anr. v. State Of U.P & Ors., Habeas 
Corpus Writ Petition No. 733 of 2020; Chandrapal Singh v. State 
of U.P., 2022 SCC OnLine All 934; Satish alias Chand v. State of 
U.P., Crl.Misc.Bail Appl.No.18596 of 2024; Aman@Vansh v. State 
of UP, 2024:AHC:62260; Monish v. State of U.P., 2023:AHC:32270; 
Mrigraj Gautam @ Rippu v. State of U.P., 2023:AHC:204171; 
Sahil  v. the State NCT of Delhi, 2024:DHC:6100; Jayantibhai 
Babulbhai Alani v. State of Gujarat, 2018 SCC Online Guj. 1223 – 
referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860; Protection 
of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012; Juvenile Justice (Care 
and Protection) Act 2015; Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 
of Children) Rules, 2007; Constitution of India; Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961.
List of Keywords
Section 439 of CrPC; Section 94 of Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection) Act 2015; Constitutional Power; Statutory power; 
Determination of age of victim; Coram Non Judice; Mini-Trial; 
Ossification Test; Section 34 of the POCSO Act; Consensual 
Adolescent Relationships; Bail; Jurisdiction; Age of victim; Statutory 
jurisdiction; Circumscribed jurisdiction; Prima facie evidence; 
Documents; Jurisdictional question; Judicial review; Professional 
Ethics; Bar; Responsibility of advocates; Romeo – Juliet clause.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
775
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
163 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 29.05.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in CRMBA No. 4880 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Ruchira Goel, Sharanya, Ms. Veera Mahuli, Ms. Ritika Rao.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
D.S. Parmar, Saurabh Singh, Vedant Tiwari, Ms. Shambhavi 
Shrivastava, Ms. Archana.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
For ease of reference, this judgment is divided into the following parts:
Contents*
The Appeal .......................................................................................
3
Facts And Previous Proceedings .....................................................
4
The Impugned Judgment ................................................................
5
Question To Be Determined ............................................................
8
Analysis And Determination .............................................................
8
Relevant Provisions .........................................................................
9
What were the bases for the High Court’s Conclusions and 
Directions? ....................................................................................... 12
The Jurisdictional Question ............................................................. 20
Whether the impugned directions rest on sound legal grounds? ... 29
Determination of the age of the victim - At what stage and by 
whom ....................................................................................... 31
Mini Trial- Impermissible at the stage of Bail .........................
50
Medically Determining the Age of the Victim .......................... 51
Summation ....................................................................................... 58
A Necessitated Post-Script ............................................................... 60
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.

776
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Sanjay Karol, J.
Leave Granted. 
The Appeal
2.	
The State of Uttar Pradesh, in this appeal by special leave, challenges 
the correctness of final judgment and order dated 29th May 2024 in 
CRMBA No. 4880 of 2024 passed by the High Court of Judicature 
at Allahabad, whereby the learned Single Judge granted bail to 
Respondent No.1 in connection with the First Information Report1 
No.622 of 2022, PS Kotwali, Orai, District Jalaun, dated 24th November 
2022 and issued a number of directions. 
3.	
The question presented in this appeal, however, is not one of relative 
ease as an appeal against grant of bail and instead hinges on the 
scope of Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732. In 
the High Court’s own words- “The question of law which arises for 
consideration in this bail application is the nature of the legal duty 
cast on the police to draw up a medical report determining the age 
of a victim while investigating POCSO Act offences. The jurisdiction 
of this Court to determine this question will predicate the discussion 
on the merits of the bail.”
Facts And Previous Proceedings
4.	
The facts, in a nutshell, are that Respondent no. 1 is accused of 
having committed offences under Sections 363, 366 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 18603 and Sections 7 and 8 of the Protection of Children 
from Sexual Offences Act, 20124 in the subject FIR, lodged at the 
instance of the mother of the victim, where the allegation is that her 
12-year old girl had been abducted from her home. The Trial Court 
rejected bail by order dated 29th September 2023. In the proceedings 
for bail before the High Court, by order dated 22nd April 2024 the 
Chief Medical Officer, Jalaun was directed to constitute a medical 
board for determination of the age of the victim. On 8th May 2024 
the Court then released the accused on interim bail, observing that 
1	
FIR
2	
CrPC
3	
IPC 
4	
POCSO Act

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
777
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
there was wide inconsistency in the age of the victim as in the school 
records, or as stated by her in her statement under Sections 161 
and 164 CrPC regarding age/intimacy with the accused among other 
factors. In terms of the impugned judgment, the Court confirmed the 
said order, while adjudicating on the issue indicated above. 
The Impugned Judgment 
5.	
The observations of the High Court can be summarised thus:
5.1	 The Court began by affirming that the jurisdiction exercised 
under Section 439 CrPC engages constitutional protection under 
Article 21. The right to bail has evolved beyond a purely statutory 
entitlement into a constitutionally safeguarded right. On this 
basis, the Court reiterated that when issues affecting personal 
liberty arise, such as legality of investigative procedures, they 
must be addressed directly within bail adjudication. 
5.2	 In assessing the age of the victim, the Court evaluated prior 
precedents of the High Court which collectively prescribe 
that medical determination of age under Section 164-A CrPC 
read with Section 27 POCSO Act is mandatory and is often 
a more reliable indicator than documentary entries. Reliance 
on Pradeep Kumar Chauhan & Anr. v. State Of U.P & Ors.5 
(passed by a learned Single Judge of that High Court) is rejected 
as misplaced due to its habeas corpus context and its non-
examination of statutory medical-age provisions. 
5.3	 The statutory scheme was analysed to conclude that Sections 
164-A CrPC and 27 POCSO Act obligate police to obtain 
the victim’s medical age report at the commencement of 
investigation. Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and 
Protection) Act 20156 supplements this mechanism. Failure to 
secure such a report rendered the statutory framework futile and 
opens scope for false implication via manipulated age claims. 
5.4	 On the factual matrix, the Court noted recurring systemic lapses 
wherein the police failed to obtain medical age reports, Trial 
Courts ignored scientifically assessed age, and consensual 
5	
Habeas Corpus Writ Petition No. 733 of 2020
6	
JJ Act

778
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
adolescent relationships were criminalised under the POCSO 
Act due to falsified age records. This systemic malfunction, 
according to the Court, necessitated corrective judicial directives. 
5.5	 Finally, applying law to fact, the Court accepted the medically 
determined age of the prosecutrix as above 18 years and 
consequently, allowed bail subject to conditions. 
5.6	 The directions issued are extracted in toto, as under:
“I) The police authorities/investigation officers shall 
ensure compliance of the directions rendered by 
this Court in Aman (supra) and ensure that the 
medical report determining the age of the victim is 
drawn up by the competent medical authority at the 
commencement of the investigations of POCSO 
Act offences in accordance with the provisions of 
the Section 164-A CrPC read with Section 27 of the 
POCSO Act.
II) The medical report of the victim determining her 
age and drawn up under Section 164-A CrPC. read 
with Section 27 of the POCSO Act shall be produced 
by the police authorities/investigation officers before 
the court hearing the bail application. The learned 
courts while hearing bail applications shall make due 
enquiries about the compliance of these directions 
and Aman (supra) during the bail proceedings.
III) The judgement of this Court rendered in Monish 
(supra), Aman (supra) as well as this case have to 
be read together and not in isolation. The directions 
in Aman (supra) as well as this case will be of little 
avail, if not examined and implemented in light of the 
directions made in Monish (supra).
IV) The age of the victim in bails arising out of POCSO 
Act offences has been determined by a composite 
reading of Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care 
and Protection of Children) Act and Section 164-A 
of CrPC. read with Section 27 of the POCSO Act in 
light of the judgements rendered in Monish (supra), 
Aman (supra) and this case.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
779
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
V) The court hearing the bail application has to accord 
full weight to the medical age determination report 
of the victim and also carefully examine all other 
documents relating to the victim’s age. The court 
has to determine the credibility of the respective 
age related documents while deciding the bail 
application in the facts of the case. In appropriate 
facts and circumstances as in the instant case, the 
age determined by the competent medical authority 
under Section 164-A of CrPC. read with Section 27 
of the POCSO Act can prevail over other agerelated 
documents (including school records).”
Question To Be Determined
6.	
The question that this Court is called upon to consider is whether 
under Section 439, CrPC the High Court could have issued 
directions, mandating age determination test to be conducted in all 
cases involving the POCSO Act. This larger question involves twin 
considerations, one on the aspect of jurisdiction and the other on the 
aspect of law i.e., the postulate of the act regarding determination 
of age, and how the directions issued in the impugned judgement 
correspond to or are in contravention of the same. 
Analysis And Determination
7.	
We have heard the learned senior counsel and learned counsel for 
the parties.
Relevant Provisions 
8.	
Before proceeding further, the provisions of law involved in this 
appeal must be referred to.
8.1	 Section 27 of the POCSO Act 
“27. Medical examination of a child.—(1) The medical 
examination of a child in respect of whom any 
offence has been committed under this Act, shall, 
notwithstanding that a First Information Report or 
complaint has not been registered for the offences 
under this Act, be conducted in accordance with 

780
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
section 164A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1973). 
(2) In case the victim is a girl child, the medical 
examination shall be conducted by a woman doctor. 
(3) The medical examination shall be conducted in 
the presence of the parent of the child or any other 
person in whom the child reposes trust or confidence. 
(4) Where, in case the parent of the child or other 
person referred to in sub-section (3) cannot be present, 
for any reason, during the medical examination of the 
child, the medical examination shall be conducted in 
the presence of a woman nominated by the head of 
the medical institution.”
(emphasis supplied)
8.2	 Section 164 of the CrPC
“[164A. Medical examination of the victim of rape.—
(1) Where, during the stage when an offence of 
committing rape or attempt to commit rape is under 
investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the 
woman with whom rape is alleged or attempted to 
have been committed or attempted, examined by a 
medical expert, such examination shall be conducted 
by a registered medical practitioner employed in a 
hospital run by the Government or a local authority 
and in the absence of such a practitioner, by any other 
registered medical practitioner, with the consent of 
such woman or of a person competent to give such 
consent on her behalf and such woman shall be sent 
to such registered medical practitioner within twenty-
four hours from the time of receiving the information 
relating to the commission of such offence. 
(2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom 
such woman is sent, shall, without delay, examine 
her person and prepare a report of his examination 
giving the following particulars, namely:— 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
781
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
(i) the name and address of the woman and 
of the person by whom she was brought; 
(ii) the age of the woman; 
(iii) the description of material taken from 
the person of the woman for DNA profiling; 
(iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person 
of the woman; 
(v) general mental condition of the woman; 
and 
(vi) other material particulars in reasonable 
detail. 
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for 
each conclusion arrived at. 
(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent 
of the woman or of the person competent to give 
such consent on her behalf to such examination had 
been obtained. 
(5) The exact time of commencement and completion 
of the examination shall also be noted in the 
report. 
(6) The registered medical practitioner shall, without 
delay forward the report to the investigating officer 
who shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in 
section 173 as part of the documents referred to in 
clause (a) of sub-section (5) of that section. 
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
rendering lawful any examination without the consent 
of the woman or of any person competent to give 
such consent on her behalf. Explanation.—For 
the purposes of this section, “examination” and 
“registered medical practitioner” shall have the same 
meanings as in section 53.]” 
(emphasis supplied)

782
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
8.3	 Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection) Act 2015 
“94. (1) Where, it is obvious to the Committee or 
the Board, based on the appearance of the person 
brought before it under any of the provisions of this 
Act (other than for the purpose of giving evidence) 
that the said person is a child, the Committee or the 
Board shall record such observation stating the age 
of the child as nearly as may be and proceed with 
the inquiry under section 14 or section 36, as the 
case may be, without waiting for further confirmation 
of the age. 
(2) In case, the Committee or the Board has 
reasonable grounds for doubt regarding whether 
the person brought before it is a child or not, the 
Committee or the Board, as the case may be, shall 
undertake the process of age determination, by 
seeking evidence by obtaining —
(i)	
the date of birth certificate from 
the school, or the matriculation 
or equivalent certificate from the 
concerned examination Board, if 
available; and in the absence thereof; 
(ii)	
the birth certificate given by a 
corporation or a municipal authority 
or a panchayat; 
(iii)	 and only in the absence of (i) and 
(ii) above, age shall be determined 
by an ossification test or any other 
latest medical age determination 
test conducted on the orders of the 
Committee or the Board: Provided 
such age determination test conducted 
on the order of the Committee or the 
Board shall be completed within fifteen 
days from the date of such order. 
(3) The age recorded by the Committee or the Board 
to be the age of person so brought before it shall, 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
783
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be the true 
age of that person. 
(emphasis supplied)
8.4	 Section 29 of the POCSO Act
“29. Presumption as to certain offences.—Where a 
person is prosecuted for committing or abetting or 
attempting to commit any offence under sections 3, 
5, 7 and section 9 of this Act, the Special Court shall 
presume, that such person has committed or abetted 
or attempted to commit the offence, as the case may 
be unless the contrary is proved.”
What were the bases for the High Court’s Conclusions and 
Directions?
9.	
Although we have, in earlier paragraphs of this judgement, summarised 
the reasoning of the High Court, let us now unpack the same with 
reference to the earlier judgements of the Court in Aman@Vansh v. 
State of UP7 and Monish v. State of U.P8. Both these judgments 
as also the judgment impugned before us, have been passed by the 
very same learned Single Judge. Since Monish (supra) was earlier 
in point of time, we will take that up first.
9.1	 The learned Single Judge in Monish (supra) held in substance, 
as follows: 
The Court examined two key questions of law: (i) whether the 
age of a victim under the POCSO Act should be determined as 
per Section 94 of JJ Act at the stage of bail, and (ii) whether 
the presumption of culpable intent under Section 29 of the 
POCSO Act applies at that stage. After extensive review, the 
Court held that Section 94 of the JJ Act, 2015 which prescribes 
a conclusive method for age determination does not apply 
strictly to bail proceedings. Instead, the documents enumerated 
in Section 94 (such as school certificates or birth certificates) 
may be considered as evidence, but their correctness can 
7	
2024:AHC:62260
8	
2023:AHC:32270

784
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
be challenged by the accused at the bail stage. The Court 
emphasized that such an assessment of age during bail 
proceedings is tentative, meant only for evaluating the prima 
facie case and not conclusive for trial purposes.
The High Court had examined and synthesized the leading 
authorities of this Court, including Abuzar Hossain @ Gulam 
Hossain v. State of West Bengal9; Parag Bhati (Juvenile) 
through Legal Guardian–Mother–Rajni Bhati v. State of 
U.P.10; Sanjeev Kumar Gupta v. State of U.P.11; Rishipal Singh 
Solanki v. State of U.P.12; and Mukarrab v. State of U.P.13. The 
collective import of these judgments is that the presumption of 
correctness attached to age-related documents under Section 
94 of JJ Act, is not absolute but rebuttable, and that a Court 
may consider other credible materials or order further inquiry, 
whenever contradictions or doubts arise about the recorded 
age. The Court further observed that accused persons have 
the right to question the veracity of age-related documents 
relied on by the prosecution. It clarified that bail courts must 
independently assess the credibility of such documents and 
may consider corroborative materials like medical reports or 
other records to resolve doubts regarding the victim’s age. The 
Court frowned upon a rigid or formulaic approach to bail under 
the POCSO Act, stressing that decisions must be based on the 
specific facts and circumstances of each case.
Regarding the presumption of culpable intent under Section 29 
of the POCSO Act, the Court held that such presumption does 
not apply at the pre-trial bail stage. The presumption becomes 
operative only once the trial begins and foundational facts are 
established through evidence. The right of the accused to contest 
this presumption and present a defence cannot be curtailed 
at the bail stage. The Court reaffirmed that constitutional and 
evidentiary principles must govern bail decisions, ensuring 
fairness and due process.
9	
(2012) 10 SCC 489
10	
(2016) 12 SCC 744
11	
(2019) 12 SCC 370
12	
(2022) 8 SCC 602
13	
(2017) 2 SCC 210

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
785
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
From a constitutional perspective, the Court reiterated that 
grant of bail is the rule and refusal the exception, aligning with 
settled principles under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. It 
noted that while the POCSO Act is a special statute aimed at 
protecting minors, it does not exclude the operation of standard 
bail principles under Section 439 CrPC. The Court, therefore, 
emphasized judicial discretion, proportionality, and individual 
case assessment as central to deciding bail. The Court held:
“78. The discussion then proceeded to probe the 
effect of Article 21 of the Constitution of India on the 
offending provisions for grant of bail. This enquiry 
was overlaid with a consideration of authorities “on 
the concept of due process in our constitutional 
jurisprudence whenever the court has to deal with a 
question affecting life and liberty of citizens”.
…
85. In view of the constitutional moorings of the right of 
bail, curtailment of the said right cannot be permitted in 
absence of an express statutory mandate or contrary 
to the constitutional scheme. Nor can restrictions of 
on right of bail be readily inferred from a statute if 
other interpretations are possible.”
The Court also discussed parameters of bail under the POCSO 
Act, holding that the nature and gravity of the offence, likelihood 
of conviction, chances of tampering with evidence, or absconding 
must be assessed in the light of constitutional protections. No 
additional restrictions on bail can be read into the POCSO Act 
beyond those under the general law. It was observed: 
“88. Bails under POCSO Act offences have to 
be considered under Section 439 Cr.P.C. and in 
accordance with the settled parameters of grant of 
bail which include nature and gravity of the offences, 
and the likelihood of an accused having committed the 
offence. The possibility of the accused reoffending, 
influencing witnesses and tampering with evidence 
or being a flight risk are also relevant factors to be 
considered while deciding a bail application. 

786
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
89. In POCSO Act related offences the age of a victim 
is a critical factor which will influence the decision 
to grant bail. 
90. No provisions circumscribing the right of bail can 
be distilled from the scheme of POCSO Act. The 
existing norms of bail jurisprudence are sufficient to 
effectively implement the POCSO Act and to serve 
justice. Of course, the threshold of satisfaction of the 
Court while granting bail may vary in the facts and 
circumstances of each case.” 
In conclusion, the Court found inconsistencies in the age-
related evidence of the victim and the existence of a prima 
facie defence by the accused that the victim was a major. The 
prosecution’s reliance on unverified documents could not justify 
continued detention, particularly when material contradictions 
were apparent. Bail was therefore granted on legal and 
constitutional grounds.
9.2	 Now, let us examine Aman (supra).
The Court noted a recurring problem in POCSO cases: frequent 
contradictions in the recorded age of victims and false depiction 
of majority as minority, often leading to the weaponisation of the 
legislation against young couples in consensual relationships. 
Medical determinations of age, drawn per the latest scientific 
protocols, were deemed more reliable and essential to prevent 
injustice.
Referring to Sections 164-A CrPC and 27 POCSO Act, the 
Court held that a medical report determining the victim’s age 
is a mandatory component of investigation in every POCSO 
case. Such reports assist Courts in making accurate findings, 
preventing false implication, and ensuring fair application of law.
Accordingly, the Court issued directions:
“1. The police authorities/investigation officers shall 
ensure that in every POCSO Act offence a medical 
report determining the victim’s age shall be drawn 
up at the outset under Section 164A of the Criminal 
Procedure Code read with Section 27 of the Protection 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
787
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. The 
report may be dispensed with if medical opinion 
advises against it in the interests of the victim’s health.
2. The medical report determining the age of the victim 
shall be created as per established procedure of law 
and in adherence to latest scientific parameters and 
medical protocol. 
3. The medical report determining the age of the victim 
shall be submitted under Section 164-A of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure to the Court without delay. 
4. The Director General (Health), Government of 
Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow shall also ensure that the 
doctors who comprise the Medical Board are duly 
trained and follow the established medical protocol 
and scientific parameters for determining the age of 
the victims in such cases. Constant research shall 
be done in this field to keep the reports in line with 
the latest scientific developments. A copy of this 
order be communicated by the learned Government 
Advocate to the Director General of Police, Lucknow, 
Uttar Pradesh for compliance and Director General 
(Health), Government of Uttar Pradesh,”
9.3	 Although it did not place reliance on Pradeep Kumar Chauhan 
(supra) a significant portion of the judgement was devoted to 
answering its application, as contended by the advocate for the 
State; hence, it is important to refer thereto. The Court undertook 
a detailed examination of the applicability of Pradeep Kumar 
Chauhan (supra) and ultimately distinguished its ratio. The 
Court observed that while Pradeep Kumar Chauhan (supra)
had been invoked in several bail applications to argue that the 
age recorded in school certificates is conclusive under Section 
94 JJ Act, such reliance was misplaced. The Court relied almost 
entirely on an earlier Full Bench decision Chandrapal Singh v. 
State of U.P.14 which had already undertaken a comprehensive 
analysis of the governing law on age determination under 
Section 94 of the JJ Act.
14	
2022 SCC OnLine All 934

788
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Relying on the reasoning in Chandrapal Singh (supra) the 
learned single Judge reaffirmed that Pradeep Kumar Chauhan 
(supra) did not correctly reflect this settled legal position. That 
decision had treated documentary proof of age such as school 
or matriculation certificates as final and conclusive, thereby 
excluding the possibility of further scrutiny. It held that such 
a restrictive view was inconsistent with the this Court’s liberal 
and contextual interpretation of Section 94 JJ Act. Accordingly, 
Pradeep Kumar Chauhan (supra) was distinguished and held 
to be inapplicable. The Court concluded that the determination 
of age, whether of a victim or an accused - must rest on the 
totality of credible evidence, and that the statutory presumptions 
under Section 94 JJ Act,though significant, are rebuttable and 
subject to judicial verification to ensure fairness and prevent 
miscarriage of justice.
The Jurisdictional Question
10.	 The High Court, while exercising bail jurisdiction issued the directions 
reproduced supra. One of the issues raised by the Appellant-State 
is that the same was beyond the scope of jurisdiction. The question 
of jurisdiction to issue these directions also confronted the learned 
Single Judge who answered the same stating that while exercising 
statutory jurisdiction, the High Court is not denuded of its constitutional 
status and, therefore, it is entirely open, to consider questions of law 
as in the present case. Observations in this regard are extracted 
hereunder:
“10. While sitting in bail determination, this Court is not 
denuded of its constitutional status. The High Court is 
a court of record and a constitutional court irrespective 
of the nomenclature of the jurisdiction it is exercising. 
Needless to add that the High Court always exercises its 
jurisdiction as per law. While deciding bail applications the 
High Court exercises a composite jurisdiction of statutory 
powers and constitutional obligations. At times legal issues 
which directly impinge on the fair administration of justice 
arise in bail jurisdiction. The High Court cannot neglect 
consideration of such issues on the footing that they are 
beyond the scope of bail jurisdiction. The High Court always 
possesses the necessary powers to decide such issues 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
789
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
for dispensing fair justice and to realize the fundamental 
rights of an accused in bail jurisdiction. Refusal to decide 
the said issues would amount to abdication of constitutional 
obligations of this Court. Issues arising in the instant case 
(and those referred in the judgment) directly impact the 
right of a prisoner to seek bail. They have to be decided by 
this Court with clarity in lawful exercise of bail jurisdiction 
and in the interests of equal justice.”
11.	 Let us now, independently examine this issue.
11.1	 Section 439 CrPC reads as under:
“439. Special powers of High Court or Court of 
Session regarding bail.—(1) A High Court or Court 
of Session may direct—
(a) that any person accused of an offence and in 
custody be released on bail, and if the offence is 
of the nature specified in sub-section (3) of Section 
437, may impose any condition which it considers 
necessary for the purposes mentioned in that sub-
section;
(b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when 
releasing any person on bail be set aside or modified:
Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session 
shall, before granting bail to a person who is accused 
of an offence which is triable exclusively by the 
Court of Session or which, though not so triable, is 
punishable with imprisonment for life, give notice 
of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor 
unless it is, for reasons to be recorded in writing, of 
opinion that it is not practicable to give such notice:
1[Provided further that the High Court or the Court of 
Session shall, before granting bail to a person who is 
accused of an offence triable under sub-section (3) 
of Section 376 or Section 376-AB or Section 376-DA 
or Section 376-DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860), give notice of the application for bail to the 
Public Prosecutor within a period of fifteen days from 
the date of receipt of the notice of such application.]

790
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2[(1-A) The presence of the informant or any person 
authorised by him shall be obligatory at the time of 
hearing of the application for bail to the person under 
sub-section (3) of Section 376 or Section 376-AB 
or Section 376-DA or Section 376-DB of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).]
(2) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that 
any person who has been released on bail under 
this Chapter be arrested and commit him to custody.
11.1.1	 In State of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi15, it was held:
“18. It is well settled that the matters to be 
considered in an application for bail are (i) 
whether there is any prima facie or reasonable 
ground to believe that the accused had 
committed the offence; (ii) nature and gravity 
of the charge; (iii) severity of the punishment 
in the event of conviction; (iv) danger of the 
accused absconding or fleeing, if released on 
bail; (v) character, behaviour, means, position 
and standing of the accused; (vi) likelihood of 
the offence being repeated; (vii) reasonable 
apprehension of the witnesses being tampered 
with; and (viii) danger, of course, of justice 
being thwarted by grant of bail [see Prahlad 
Singh Bhati v. NCT, Delhi [(2001) 4 SCC 280 : 
2001 SCC (Cri) 674] and Gurcharan Singh v. 
State (Delhi Admn.) [(1978) 1 SCC 118 : 1978 
SCC (Cri) 41 : AIR 1978 SC 179] ]. While a 
vague allegation that the accused may tamper 
with the evidence or witnesses may not be a 
ground to refuse bail, if the accused is of such 
character that his mere presence at large would 
intimidate the witnesses or if there is material 
to show that he will use his liberty to subvert 
justice or tamper with the evidence, then bail 
will be refused…”
15	
(2005) 8 SCC 21

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
791
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
11.1.2	 Vaman Narain Ghiya v. State of Rajasthan16, held thus:
“11. While considering an application for 
bail, detailed discussion of the evidence and 
elaborate documentation of the merits is to 
be avoided. This requirement stems from 
the desirability that no party should have 
the impression that his case has been pre-
judged. Existence of a prima facie case is 
only to be considered. Elaborate analysis or 
exhaustive exploration of the merits is not 
required. (See Niranjan Singh v. Prabhakar 
Rajaram Kharote [(1980) 2 SCC 559 : 1980 
SCC (Cri) 508 : AIR 1980 SC 785] .) Where 
the offence is of serious nature the question 
of grant of bail has to be decided keeping in 
view the nature and seriousness of the offence, 
character of the evidence and amongst others 
the larger interest of the public. (See State 
of Maharashtra  v. Anand Chintaman Dighe 
[(1990) 1 SCC 397 : 1990 SCC (Cri) 142 : 
AIR 1990 SC 625] and State v. Surendranath 
Mohanty [(1990) 3 OCR 462] .)”
11.1.3	 In State v. M. Murugesan17, a two Judge bench of 
this Court analysed various judgements wherein it was 
concluded that the Court had overstepped the bounds 
of Section 439, viz., State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal 
Singh Bhullar18 wherein the concerned High Court 
had continued to pass orders with respect to offenders 
not connected with the instant case; Sangitaben 
Shaileshbhai Datanta v. State of Gujarat19 wherein 
the Court, in a bail application had directed the accused 
and his family to undergo a narco-analysis test and a 
brain mapping test; RBI v. Coop. Bank Deposit A/C HR. 
16	
(2009) 2 SCC 281
17	
(2020) 15 SCC 251
18	
(2011) 14 SCC 770
19	
(2019) 14 SCC 522

792
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Sha20 once again in a bail application, issued directions 
to the concerned bank to begin disbursing the amount 
thus far recovered from the accused in the case. Having 
referred to these judgements, it was held as under:
“11. We find that the learned Single Judge [M. 
Murugesan v. State, 2019 SCC OnLine Mad 
12414] has collated data from the State and 
made it part of the order after the decision 
[M. Murugesan v. State, Criminal Original 
Petition No. 1618 of 2019, order dated 
18-2-2019 (Mad)] of the bail application, as 
if the Court had the inherent jurisdiction to 
pass any order under the guise of improving 
the criminal justice system in the State. The 
jurisdiction of the court under Section 439 of 
the Code is limited to grant or not to grant 
bail pending trial. Even though the object 
of the Hon’ble Judge was laudable but the 
jurisdiction exercised was clearly erroneous. 
The effort made by the Hon’ble Judge may 
be academically proper to be presented at an 
appropriate forum but such directions could not 
be issued under the colour of office of the court.
(emphasis supplied)
11.1.4	 In Union of India v. Man Singh Verma21, this Court 
through one of us, (Sanjay Karol J.,) set aside an 
order, passed while exercising bail jurisdiction, granting 
compensation to the extent of Rs. 5,00,000/- for wrongful 
confinement, as being without the authority of law. 
11.2	 The upshot of the above discussion is that a Court’s jurisdiction, 
i.e., either the Court of Sessions or the High Court under 
Section 439 CrPC is limited to adjudicating the question of the 
person concerned being released into society pending trial or 
whether they should continue to be incarcerated.
20	
(2010) 15 SCC 85
21	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 456

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
793
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
11.3	 It is unquestionable that High Court is a constitutional Court. 
However, in the instant case the error of jurisdiction by the 
High Court was in exercise of a statutory power and not under 
the Constitution. The powers arising from the Constitution 
and those flowing from a statute are distinct and separate. A 
constitutional power is the one which emanates directly from 
the text and spirit of the Constitution of India, the supreme 
and fundamental charter of governance, and inheres in those 
institutions or functionaries whose existence and competence 
are defined by it. Such powers are self-sustaining; they are not 
contingent upon any act of the Legislature, nor can they be 
abridged or extinguished except through a formal amendment 
under Article 368. For example, the President’s power to 
dissolve the Lok Sabha under Article 85(2)(b); the Governor’s 
authority to reserve a bill for the consideration of the President 
under Article 200, or the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under 
Article 32 are all in exercise of constitutional power. These 
powers represent the apex of the legal hierarchy, deriving their 
legitimacy not from the will of the people as expressed by 
Parliament, but from the sovereignty of the Constitution itself.
In contrast, a statutory power is derivative and conditional, 
drawing its vitality from a law duly enacted by the Parliament 
or a State Legislature. Such power exists only within the four 
corners of the enabling statute and is circumscribed by its 
language, purpose, and legislative intent. Illustratively, the 
powers conferred upon the Central Government under the 
Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986, to frame rules, issue 
directions, or regulate industrial operations are purely statutory 
in nature, as are the regulatory functions vested in the Securities 
and Exchange Board of India under the SEBI Act, 1992, or 
those entrusted to the Competition Commission of India under 
the Competition Act, 2002. The exercise of these powers must 
conform strictly to the parameters laid down by the statute; 
any transgression beyond its express or implied authority is 
rendered ultra vires and, therefore, void in the eyes of law.
The essential distinction between these two species of power 
lies not merely in their origin but also in their constitutional 
status and susceptibility to control. Constitutional powers are 
sovereign, foundational, and insulated from the vicissitudes of 

794
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
ordinary legislation; they can neither be curtailed nor expanded 
by parliamentary enactment. Statutory powers, by contrast, 
are subordinate and mutable, existing at the pleasure of the 
Legislature, which may at any time amend, restrict, or repeal 
them through the ordinary legislative process. Judicial review, 
while applicable to both, assumes different contours in each 
case: in relation to constitutional powers, the Courts examine 
whether their exercise conforms to constitutional limitations 
including the protection of fundamental rights and the inviolable 
tenets of the basic structure whereas, in the case of statutory 
powers, the inquiry is confined to whether the authority has 
acted within the scope and purpose of the statute from which 
its power is drawn.
The constitutional power cannot overshadow the statutory 
power, enlarging its scope beyond what has been envisaged 
by the statute. In other words, while both powers rest with 
the High Court, one power cannot usurp the ambit of another, 
unless otherwise permitted by law. 
11.4	 Let us understand this by way of an example. Suppose a 
dispute arises between the Government of State ‘A’ and the 
Government of the Union of India, concerning a statutory 
scheme. The State files a suit in the Supreme Court under 
Article 131 claiming the Union has over-stepped its power. 
Because Article 131 deals with original jurisdiction and 
involves questions of fact and law between governments, the 
Supreme Court may frame issues, permit evidence, summon 
and examine witnesses, and make findings of fact as part of 
its adjudication.
In the same case, imagine if a private party (or even the 
State) tries to approach the Supreme Court under Article 136, 
claiming injustice in a judgment of a High Court or Tribunal in 
the same matter. While Article 136 gives the Court the power 
to grant leave to appeal, the Court cannot treat its jurisdiction 
under Article 136 as though it were a suit under Article 131.
If the Court were to proceed under Article 136 but adopt the 
full evidentiary/litigation machinery of Article 131 (leading fresh 
evidence, summoning witnesses, conducting trial proceedings), 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
795
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
it would step into the turf of Article 131 and thereby blur the 
distinction between the two powers. That would amount to an 
improper exercise of jurisdiction.
11.5	 On the aspect of jurisdiction, consequent to the discussion 
above, we have no hesitation in holding that the High Court 
had erred in undertaking such an exercise of issuing directions 
and getting the age of the victim examined in an application 
seeking grant of bail . 
Whether the impugned directions rest on sound legal grounds?
12.	 Let us now turn our attention to the provisions of law involved. The 
purpose of doing so is to examine whether the directions issued by 
the High Court to mandatorily conduct a test for age verification at 
the inception of the investigation is sustainable in law, if this question 
of law is examined as divorced from the aspect of jurisdiction.
13.	 At the outset of this analysis, it is important to delve into the scope 
and ambit of the POCSO Act. Pardiwala J, writing for the Court 
in Just Rights for Children Alliance v. S. Harish22, examined in 
detail, the objects, reasons and scope of the legislation. Relevant 
paragraphs of the decision are extracted hereinbelow:
“43. The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the 
enactment of the POCSO makes it abundantly clear 
that since the sexual offences against children were not 
adequately addressed by the existing laws and a large 
number of such offences were neither specifically provided 
for nor were they adequately penalized, the POCSO has 
been enacted to protect the children from the offences of 
sexual assault, sexual harassment and pornography and 
to provide for establishment of Special Courts for trial of 
such offences and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto.
44. It further states that the POCSO is a ‘self-contained 
comprehensive legislation’ for the purpose of enforcing 
the rights of all children to safety, security and protection 
from sexual abuse and exploitation countered through 
22	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 2611

796
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
commensurate penalties as an effective deterrence for 
sexual offences and pornography and has been enacted 
keeping in mind Articles 15 and 39 of the Constitution 
respectively and the United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of the Children. …
45. The primary legislative intent behind the enactment 
of the POCSO was to create a comprehensive legal 
framework that would not only punish offenders but 
also provide a child-friendly system for the recording of 
evidence, investigation, and trial of offenses. The POCSO 
was designed to cover all forms of sexual abuse against 
children, including sexual harassment, child pornography, 
and aggravated sexual assault, among others. It aimed 
to ensure the safety and dignity of child victims during 
the legal process, with specific provisions that mandate 
in-camera trials, the presence of a trusted adult during the 
proceedings, and the prohibition of aggressive questioning 
of child victims.
(emphasis in original)
Determination of the age of the victim - At what stage and by 
whom
13.1	 Section 2(d)of the POCSO Act defines a child as any person 
below eighteen years. So, for the provisions of this Act to be 
applied, the person against whom the offence in question has 
been perpetrated must necessarily be below 18 years of age. 
This is the sine qua non. The natural question which then arises 
is how the age of victim is to be determined. Jarnail Singh v. 
State of Haryana23 put this question to rest as follows:
“23. Even though Rule 12 is strictly applicable 
only to determine the age of a child in conflict with 
law, we are of the view that the aforesaid statutory 
provision should be the basis for determining age, 
even of a child who is a victim of crime. For, in our 
23	
(2013) 7 SCC 263

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
797
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
view, there is hardly any difference insofar as the 
issue of minority is concerned, between a child in 
conflict with law, and a child who is a victim of crime. 
Therefore, in our considered opinion, it would be just 
and appropriate to apply Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules, 
to determine the age of the prosecutrix VW, PW 6. 
The manner of determining age conclusively has 
been expressed in sub-rule (3) of Rule 12 extracted 
above. Under the aforesaid provision, the age of a 
child is ascertained by adopting the first available 
basis out of a number of options postulated in 
Rule 12(3). If, in the scheme of options under Rule 
12(3), an option is expressed in a preceding clause, 
it has overriding effect over an option expressed 
in a subsequent clause. The highest rated option 
available would conclusively determine the age of 
a minor. In the scheme of Rule 12(3), matriculation 
(or equivalent) certificate of the child concerned is 
the highest rated option. In case, the said certificate 
is available, no other evidence can be relied upon. 
Only in the absence of the said certificate, Rule 
12(3) envisages consideration of the date of birth 
entered in the school first attended by the child. In 
case such an entry of date of birth is available, the 
date of birth depicted therein is liable to be treated 
as final and conclusive, and no other material is to 
be relied upon. Only in the absence of such entry, 
Rule 12(3) postulates reliance on a birth certificate 
issued by a corporation or a municipal authority 
or a panchayat. Yet again, if such a certificate is 
available, then no other material whatsoever is to 
be taken into consideration for determining the age 
of the child concerned, as the said certificate would 
conclusively determine the age of the child. It is only 
in the absence of any of the aforesaid, that Rule 
12(3) postulates the determination of age of the 
child concerned, on the basis of medical opinion.”
(emphasis supplied)

798
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) 
Rules, 200724 it must be noted, provides the same hierarchy 
of documents as has been provided by Section 94 of the JJ 
Act. The same is reproduced below for felicity of reference:
“12.Procedure to be followed in determination of 
age.—(1) In every case concerning a child or a 
juvenile in conflict with law, the court or the Board 
or as the case may be, the Committee referred to in 
Rule 19 of these Rules shall determine the age of 
such juvenile or child or a juvenile in conflict with law 
within a period of thirty days from the date of making 
of the application for that purpose.
(2) The court or the Board or as the case may be the 
Committee shall decide the juvenility or otherwise of 
the juvenile or the child or as the case may be the 
juvenile in conflict with law, prima facie on the basis 
of physical appearance or documents, if available, 
and send him to the observation home or in jail.
(3) In every case concerning a child or juvenile in 
conflict with law, the age determination inquiry shall 
be conducted by the court or the Board or, as the 
case may be, the Committee by seeking evidence 
by obtaining—
(a)(i) the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if 
available; and in the absence whereof;
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the school (other 
than a play school) first attended; and in the absence 
whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a 
municipal authority or a panchayat;
(b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii) of 
clause (a) above, the medical opinion will be sought 
from a duly constituted Medical Board, which will 
declare the age of the juvenile or child. In case exact 
assessment of the age cannot be done, the court or 
24	
Rules 2007

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
799
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee, for 
the reasons to be recorded by them, may, if considered 
necessary, give benefit to the child or juvenile by 
considering his/her age on lower side within the margin 
of one year,and, while passing orders in such case 
shall, after taking into consideration such evidence as 
may be available, or the medical opinion, as the case 
may be, record a finding in respect of his age and 
either of the evidence specified in any of the clauses 
(a)(i), (ii), (iii) or in the absence whereof, clause (b) 
shall be the conclusive proof of the age as regards 
such child or the juvenile in conflict with law.
(4) If the age of a juvenile or child or the juvenile in 
conflict with law is found to be below 18 years on the 
date of offence, on the basis of any of the conclusive 
proof specified in sub-rule (3), the court or the Board 
or as the case may be the Committee shall in writing 
pass an order stating the age and declaring the status 
of juvenility or otherwise, for the purpose of the Act 
and these Rules and a copy of the order shall be 
given to such juvenile or the person concerned.
(5) Save and except where, further inquiry or 
otherwise is required, inter alia, in terms of Section 
7-A, Section 64 of the Act and these Rules, no further 
inquiry shall be conducted by the court or the Board 
after examining and obtaining the certificate or any 
other documentary proof referred to in sub-rule (3) 
of this Rule.
(6) The provisions contained in this Rule shall also 
apply to those disposed of cases, where the status 
of juvenility has not been determined in accordance 
with the provisions contained in sub-rule (3) and the 
Act, requiring dispensation of the sentence under the 
Act for passing appropriate order in the interest of 
the juvenile in conflict with law.”
14.	 The High Court held that since the presumption of correctness 
attached to age-related documents under Section 94 JJ Act is 
rebuttable, challenge to the same would be open at the stage of 

800
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
bail and the view taken by the Court in such a challenge, would be 
“tentative”. Analysis of the judgments referred to by the Court would 
be apposite. 
14.1	 In Abuzar Hossain (supra) a bench of three judges held as 
under:
“39.3. As to what materials would prima facie satisfy 
the court and/or are sufficient for discharging the 
initial burden cannot be catalogued nor can it be 
laid down as to what weight should be given to a 
specific piece of evidence which may be sufficient 
to raise presumption of juvenility but the documents 
referred to in Rules 12(3)(a)(i) to (iii) shall definitely 
be sufficient for prima facie satisfaction of the court 
about the age of the delinquent necessitating further 
enquiry under Rule 12. The statement recorded under 
Section 313 of the Code is too tentative and may not 
by itself be sufficient ordinarily to justify or reject the 
claim of juvenility. The credibility and/or acceptability 
of the documents like the school leaving certificate or 
the voters’ list, etc. obtained after conviction would 
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case 
and no hard-and-fast rule can be prescribed that they 
must be prima facie accepted or rejected. In Akbar 
Sheikh [(2009) 7 SCC 415 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 431] 
and Pawan [(2009) 15 SCC 259 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 
522] these documents were not found prima facie 
credible while in Jitendra Singh [(2010) 13 SCC 523 : 
(2011) 1 SCC (Cri) 857] the documents viz. school 
leaving certificate, marksheet and the medical report 
were treated sufficient for directing an inquiry and 
verification of the appellant’s age. If such documents 
prima facie inspire confidence of the court, the court 
may act upon such documents for the purposes of 
Section 7-A and order an enquiry for determination 
of the age of the delinquent.”
14.2	 In Parag Bhati (supra) a co-ordinate bench held as under:
“34. It is no doubt true that if there is a clear and 
unambiguous case in favour of the juvenile accused 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
801
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
that he was a minor below the age of 18 years on the 
date of the incident and the documentary evidence 
at least prima facie proves the same, he would be 
entitled to the special protection under the JJ Act. 
But when an accused commits a grave and heinous 
offence and thereafter attempts to take statutory 
shelter under the guise of being a minor, a casual 
or cavalier approach while recording as to whether 
an accused is a juvenile or not cannot be permitted 
as the courts are enjoined upon to perform their 
duties with the object of protecting the confidence 
of common man in the institution entrusted with the 
administration of justice.
35. The benefit of the principle of benevolent 
legislation attached to the JJ Act would thus apply 
to only such cases wherein the accused is held to 
be a juvenile on the basis of at least prima facie 
evidence regarding his minority as the benefit of 
the possibilities of two views in regard to the age of 
the alleged accused who is involved in grave and 
serious offence which he committed and gave effect 
to it in a well-planned manner reflecting his maturity 
of mind rather than innocence indicating that his 
plea of juvenility is more in the nature of a shield to 
dodge or dupe the arms of law, cannot be allowed 
to come to his rescue.
36. It is settled position of law that if the matriculation 
or equivalent certificates are available and there is 
no other material to prove the correctness of date of 
birth, the date of birth mentioned in the matriculation 
certificate has to be treated as a conclusive proof of 
the date of birth of the accused. However, if there is 
any doubt or a contradictory stand is being taken by 
the accused which raises a doubt on the correctness 
of the date of birth then as laid down by this Court 
in Abuzar Hossain [Abuzar Hossain v. State of W.B., 
(2012) 10 SCC 489 : (2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 83] , an 
enquiry for determination of the age of the accused 

802
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
is permissible which has been done in the present 
case.”
(emphasis supplied)
14.3	 In Sanjeev Kumar Gupta (supra) the question was whether 
the accused was entitled to claim the benefit of juvenility for an 
offence committed on 18th August 2015. The Juvenile Justice 
Board25 at first allowed the plea but then on demand, eventually 
decided otherwise and rejected the said having considered 
evidence in that regard. The High Court reversed holding 
that the matriculation certificate issued by the CBSE would 
be given precedence over the opinion of the Medical Board. 
The former recorded his date of birth as 17th December 1998 
whereas the latter recorded that on 9th November 2016, he 
was approximately 19 years of age. This Court set aside the 
findings of the High Court and restored the rejection of the plea 
of juvenility as returned by the JJB, having considered evidence 
on affidavit and arriving at the conclusion that his age would 
be determined as per the date of birth - 17th December 1995.
14.4	 In Rishipal Singh Solanki (supra) this Court while dealing 
with an appeal filed by the father of the deceased noted the 
difference between the Rules 2007 and the JJ Act 2015. It 
was observed:
“29. The difference in the procedure under the two 
enactments could be discerned as under:
29.1. As per the JJ Act, 2015 in the absence of 
requisite documents as mentioned in clauses (i) 
and (ii) of Section 94(2), there is provision for 
determination of the age by an ossification test or 
any other medical age related test to be conducted 
on the orders of the Committee or the JJ Board as 
per Section 94 of the said Act; whereas, under Rule 
12 of the JJ Rules, 2007, in the absence of relevant 
documents, a medical opinion had to be sought from 
a duly constituted Medical Board which would declare 
the age of the juvenile or child.
25	
JJB

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
803
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
29.2. With regard to the documents to be provided 
as evidence, what was provided under Rule 12 of 
the JJ Rules, 2007 has been provided under sub-
section (2) of Section 94 of the JJ Act, 2015 as a 
substantive provision.
29.3. Under Section 49 of the JJ Act, 2000, where 
it appeared to a competent authority that a person 
brought before it was a juvenile or a child, then such 
authority could, after making an inquiry and taking 
such evidence as was necessary, record a finding 
as to the juvenility of such person and state the age 
of such person as nearly as may be. Sub-section (2) 
of Section 49 stated that no order of a competent 
authority shall be deemed to have become invalid 
merely by any subsequent proof that the person in 
respect of whom the order had been made is not 
a juvenile and the age recorded by the competent 
authority to be the age of person so brought before 
it, for the purpose of the Act, be deemed to be the 
true age of that person.
30. But, under Section 94 of the JJ Act, 2015, which 
also deals with presumption and determination of age, 
the Committee or the JJ Board has to record such 
observation stating the age of the child as nearly as 
may be and proceed with the inquiry without waiting 
for further confirmation of the age. It is only when the 
Committee or the JJ Board has reasonable grounds 
for doubt regarding whether the person brought before 
it is a child or not, it can undertake the process of 
age determination, by seeking evidence.
31. Sub-section (3) of Section 94 states that the 
age recorded by the Committee or the JJ Board to 
be the age of the persons so brought before it shall, 
for the purpose of the Act, be deemed to be the true 
age of that person. Thus, there is a finality attached 
to the determination of the age recorded and it is 
only in a case where reasonable grounds exist for 
doubt as to whether the person brought before the 

804
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Committee or the Board is a child or not, that a 
process of age determination by seeking evidence 
has to be undertaken.”
Then further, it was held-
“33.1. A claim of juvenility may be raised at any stage of 
a criminal proceeding, even after a final disposal of the 
case. A delay in raising the claim of juvenility cannot be 
a ground for rejection of such claim. It can also be raised 
for the first time before this Court.
33.2. An application claiming juvenility could be made 
either before the court or the JJ Board.
33.2.1. When the issue of juvenility arises before a court, 
it would be under sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 9 
of the JJ Act, 2015 but when a person is brought before 
a committee or JJ Board, Section 94 of the JJ Act, 2015 
applies.
33.2.2. If an application is filed before the court claiming 
juvenility, the provision of sub-section (2) of Section 94 of 
the JJ Act, 2015 would have to be applied or read along 
with sub-section (2) of Section 9 so as to seek evidence 
for the purpose of recording a finding stating the age of 
the person as nearly as may be.
33.2.3. When an application claiming juvenility is made 
under Section 94 of the JJ Act, 2015 before the JJ Board 
when the matter regarding the alleged commission of 
offence is pending before a court, then the procedure 
contemplated under Section 94 of the JJ Act, 2015 
would apply. Under the said provision if the JJ Board 
has reasonable grounds for doubt regarding whether the 
person brought before it is a child or not, the Board shall 
undertake the process of age determination by seeking 
evidence and the age recorded by the JJ Board to be 
the age of the person so brought before it shall, for the 
purpose of the JJ Act, 2015, be deemed to be true age of 
that person. Hence the degree of proof required in such 
a proceeding before the JJ Board, when an application is 
filed seeking a claim of juvenility when the trial is before the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
805
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
criminal court concerned, is higher than when an inquiry 
is made by a court before which the case regarding the 
commission of the offence is pending (vide Section 9 of 
the JJ Act, 2015).
33.3. That when a claim for juvenility is raised, the burden 
is on the person raising the claim to satisfy the court to 
discharge the initial burden. However, the documents 
mentioned in Rules 12(3)(a)(i), (ii) and (iii) of the JJ Rules, 
2007 made under the JJ Act, 2000 or sub-section (2) of 
Section 94 of the JJ Act, 2015, shall be sufficient for prima 
facie satisfaction of the court. On the basis of the aforesaid 
documents a presumption of juvenility may be raised.
33.4. The said presumption is however not conclusive proof 
of the age of juvenility and the same may be rebutted by 
contra evidence let in by the opposite side.
33.5. That the procedure of an inquiry by a court is not the 
same thing as declaring the age of the person as a juvenile 
sought before the JJ Board when the case is pending for 
trial before the criminal court concerned. In case of an 
inquiry, the court records a prima facie conclusion but 
when there is a determination of age as per sub-section 
(2) of Section 94 of the 2015 Act, a declaration is made 
on the basis of evidence. Also the age recorded by the JJ 
Board shall be deemed to be the true age of the person 
brought before it. Thus, the standard of proof in an inquiry 
is different from that required in a proceeding where the 
determination and declaration of the age of a person 
has to be made on the basis of evidence scrutinised and 
accepted only if worthy of such acceptance.
33.6. That it is neither feasible nor desirable to lay down 
an abstract formula to determine the age of a person. It 
has to be on the basis of the material on record and on 
appreciation of evidence adduced by the parties in each 
case.
33.11. Ossification test cannot be the sole criterion for age 
determination and a mechanical view regarding the age of 
a person cannot be adopted solely on the basis of medical 
opinion by radiological examination. Such evidence is not 

806
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
conclusive evidence but only a very useful guiding factor 
to be considered in the absence of documents mentioned 
in Section 94(2) of the JJ Act, 2015.”
(emphasis supplied)
14.5	 Now we proceed to examine the merits of this argument. It 
is clear from the above that all of these cases discuss the 
determination of age from the point of view of the offender and 
not the victim. Although the process to be followed therefor 
is the same as that for an offender as held by Jarnail Singh 
(supra), the question involved in the instant lis concerns the 
forum and the stage at which the determination of age is to 
be made. According to the High Court, the bail Court would, 
if a challenge is presented by the offender, entertain such 
challenge and take a prima facie view. Here, it becomes 
important to appreciate the difference between the JJ Act and 
the POCSO Act. 
14.5.1	 The JJ Act is primarily focused on dealing with 
children in conflict with law and children in need of 
care and protection, rather than victims of offences 
who are minors. The Preamble and Section 1(4) of 
the Act expressly state that its purpose is to provide 
for the care, protection, treatment, development, and 
rehabilitation of such children and for the adjudication 
of matters relating to children in conflict with law. 
The Act establishes the JJB (under Sections 4–9) 
to handle cases involving juvenile offenders, and 
the Child Welfare Committee26 (under Sections 
27–30) to deal with children who require care and 
protection. Neither of these bodies are vested with 
jurisdiction over cases concerning child victims of 
crime. The definitions provided under the Act, of a 
child in conflict with law and a child in need of care 
and protection, also clearly underscore this. The Act 
draws a fundamental distinction between two principal 
categories of children – children in conflict with law 
and children in need of care and protection each 
26	
CWC

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
807
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
grounded in the philosophy of welfare, rehabilitation, 
and reintegration. A child in conflict with law refers 
to a person who has not completed eighteen years 
of age and is alleged or found to have committed 
an offence under any existing law. To fall under this 
category, the requirements are, first, that the person 
must be below eighteen years of age at the time of 
the commission of the alleged offence, and second, 
that there is an allegation or finding of involvement in 
an act constituting an offence. The Act thus rejects the 
traditional punitive model of criminal jurisprudence and 
adopts a reformative, restorative approach, recognizing 
that a child’s deviant conduct often arises from a coming 
together in an unfortunate array of circumstances, of 
structural neglect, social disadvantage, or exposure 
to adversity The focus, therefore, is on correction, 
guidance, and social reintegration through child-friendly 
processes before the JJB , ensuring that such children 
are treated not as offenders but as individuals in need 
of direction and support.
14.5.2	 Conversely, a child in need of care and protection 
denotes a child whose condition of neglect, abuse, 
abandonment, or deprivation necessitates intervention 
by the State to secure their safety, welfare, and 
development. This classification embraces children 
who are orphaned or abandoned; those found begging, 
working, or living on the streets; those who are victims 
of cruelty, exploitation, or trafficking; those who are 
physically or mentally challenged and without adequate 
family support; and those at imminent risk of early 
marriage or neglect within the home ,(which in a given 
case, could also be a victim). The essence of this 
definition lies in the child’s exposure to vulnerability 
and the corresponding necessity of care, protection, 
and rehabilitation through the mechanisms of the 
CWC. The Act’s protective framework thus ensures that 
children who are deprived of a nurturing environment 
are restored to stability, dignity, and opportunity through 
institutional or family-based care.

808
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
14.5.3	 While these two categories emerge from different 
factual matrices, one involving alleged delinquency and 
the other deprivation, they converge upon a shared 
humanitarian foundation. Both are guided by the 
principle that every child is entitled to protection, dignity, 
and development, and that the justice system must 
operate with sensitivity and compassion. This Court 
has many-a-time emphasised that the administration 
of juvenile justice must rest on care and rehabilitation 
rather than punishment, highlighting the State’s duty 
to protect all children from circumstances that impede 
their growth and well-being.
14.5.4	 It is, however, imperative to recognise that neither of 
these statutory classifications - the child in conflict 
with law or the child in need of care and protection 
expressly includes within its ambit the category of 
child victims. Although both categories are designed 
to shield children from neglect and marginalisation, 
the Act does not explicitly address the position of 
children who are victims of offences, as those under 
POCSO Act. Unless such victims independently 
satisfy the definitional parameters of vulnerability or 
abandonment, they fall outside the direct purview of 
these classifications. This reveals a conceptual gap, 
as the legislative scheme, while comprehensive in its 
welfare orientation, does not formally integrate the 
rehabilitative and procedural rights of child victims 
within its framework. Nevertheless, the broader spirit 
of the Act, anchored in compassion, protection, and 
restorative justice demands that child victims, too, be 
accorded equivalent care, support, and rehabilitative 
attention, ensuring that every child, irrespective of 
circumstance, is empowered to reclaim their dignity 
and future.
14.6	
Having discussed thus, the two separate fields that these two 
legislations govern, we now turn back to the question of age 
determination. If the POCSO Act is examined, it can be found 
that the Act does not prescribe a manner for determination 
of the age of the victim. As we have already noticed, it is an 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
809
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
established position in law that the procedure under Section 94 
of the JJ Act is to be applied.[See: Section 34 of the Act] When 
the question of determination of age of a child in conflict with 
the law emerges for the first time before a Court, the concerned 
legislation provides the procedure as housed in its Section 
9 of the Act lays down the procedure to be followed when a 
person is brought before a Magistrate who is not empowered 
under the Act, and there arises a claim or reasonable doubt 
that such person is a child. In such cases, the Magistrate 
must conduct an inquiry to determine the person’s age in 
accordance with Section 94 of the Act, which prescribes the 
method for age determination. If, upon inquiry, the Magistrate 
finds that the person was a child at the time of commission of 
offence, the case must be immediately forwarded to the JJB 
having jurisdiction, which will thereafter deal with the matter 
as per the provisions of the JJ Act. Conversely, if the person is 
found not to be a child, the Magistrate proceeds with the case 
as per the regular criminal procedure. The object of Section 
9 is to ensure that no juvenile offender is tried as an adult 
merely due to an initial misclassification and to safeguard the 
rehabilitative and welfare-oriented spirit of the juvenile justice 
system by ensuring that every child in conflict with law is tried 
by the appropriate forum, i.e., the JJB
14.7	
As held in Rishipal Singh, extracted (supra) the determination 
of the age when done by a Court stands differently to that 
done by the JJB. There are two possibilities provided for. 
There is no determination of age by a JJB - like body when 
it comes to the victim. If there is a question about the age, 
it has to be dealt with by the Court, as per the procedure of 
Section 94, JJ Act. It is when the Court is undertaking the 
exercise of determination, that the defense of an accused 
can challenge the veracity of these documents, since the 
presumption under this section is rebuttable. 
14.8	
As is obvious and as we have observed, the victim being a 
child is sine qua non for the application of the POCSO Act. 
If a charge-sheet is filed and it contains charges against a 
person under the POCSO Act, it is but obvious that such 
an accused would challenge the same at the first available 
instance in the Court concerned, or in other words, at the 

810
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
inception of trial, so as to ensure that the foundation of the 
trial is correctly in place before it proceeds further. The Court 
would then undertake the exercise as provided for, and in 
accordance with the result obtained therefrom, proceed further, 
either under the POCSO Act or under the provisions of the 
IPC, as the case may be. Should the accused be dissatisfied 
with the manner in which the result has been drawn by the 
Trial Court, an appeal from such determination would have 
to be filed and only when the question of age is set at rest 
can the trial proceed forward on firm footing. 
14.9	
Unlike an offender who can claim benefit of juvenility at any 
point in time, even after completion of proceedings given the 
beneficial nature of the JJ Act, a victim of a crime cannot claim 
to be a juvenile at any point in time, for the charges against 
which an offender is tried, are intrinsically tied to the age of 
the victim. If a victim of a sexual offence was allowed to claim 
juvenility at any stage of the proceedings, in the same manner 
that an offender can under Section 9 of the JJ Act, it would 
have serious procedural and substantive consequences. For 
instance, an accused may have been charged under Section 
376 IPC which applies when the victim is an adult. However, if 
the victim is later determined to be below eighteen, the offence 
would fall under the POCSO Act, where consent is irrelevant 
and the punishments are more stringent. This would mean that 
the earlier trial, framing of charges, and recording of evidence 
were all conducted under an incorrect legal framework. The 
proceedings would therefore be vitiated, and the trial could 
be rendered a nullity, necessitating the reframing of charges 
and a fresh trial under the correct statute.
14.10	 As can be seen from Mahadeo v. State of Maharashtra27, 
and Sanjeev Kumar Gupta (supra) the consideration of the 
documents enumerated in Section 94, JJ Act is a matter of 
consideration of evidence since it may involve the examination 
of witnesses to prove the veracity of the documents. That can 
only be done by the Trial Court. Contra evidence to challenge 
the documents, can also be presented only before the Trial 
27	
(2013) 14 SCC 637

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
811
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
Court. In our considered view, therefore, the High Court fell in 
error in holding that a Court in bail jurisdiction is empowered 
to entertain a challenge to the documents as Section 94 would 
not apply at the bail stage. 
Mini Trial- Impermissible at the stage of Bail
15.	 There is an additional aspect which, if the proposition as posited by 
the impugned judgment is upheld, would fall foul of. Such aspect 
would be that a Court, at the stage of bail cannot conduct a mini 
trial. This position is trite in law. Reference to the judgments as under 
would reiterate the same-
15.1	 In Union of India v. K.A. Najeeb28, it was held by a bench 
of three judges that the High Court could not at the stage 
of bail conduct a mini trial and adjudicate, for instance, the 
admissibility of certain evidence. 
15.2	 In Amlesh Kumar v. State of Bihar29, this Court observed 
that when a Court is exercising powers under Section 439 
CrPC, such power does not permit the ordering of roving 
enquiries, or in the context of that case, the use of involuntary 
investigative techniques. 
15.3	 Let us also understand this by juxtaposition. Section 482 CrPC 
empowers the High Court to prevent abuse of the process of 
law and secure the ends of justice, including quashing criminal 
proceedings or staying investigations. Even under these broad 
powers, courts are not permitted to re-examine witnesses or 
conclusively decide disputed factual issues. Section 439, by 
contrast, is limited to granting bail or anticipatory bail and 
requires the Court to consider only prima facie evidence, the 
risk of the accused absconding, tampering with evidence, or 
other relevant factors. Since Section 439 is narrower in scope, 
the Court cannot undertake a mini trial at the bail stage. 
Medically Determining the Age of the Victim
16.	 Apropos the above discussion, it is clearly held that determination of 
age of the victim is a matter of trial and not at the stage of bail. If the 
28	
(2021) 3 SCC 713 
29	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1326

812
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
age is under question, the bail Court may examine the documents 
produced to establish age, but it will not enter into the question of 
those documents being correct or not so. The mandate of Section 
94 JJ Act is clear. The documents provided therein are to be utilized 
for determination of the age of the victim, and only in the absence 
thereof, will medical evidence be resorted to. The decisions in 
P. Yuvaprakash v. State30 and Rajni v. State of UP31 make this as 
evident as can be. 
16.1	 Yuvaprakash (supra) was a case involving the alleged 
kidnapping of one ‘M’, by the appellant, alleged forced marriage 
by tying a ‘thali’ around her neck, and thereafter, repeated 
sexual intercourse over a period of time, before abandoning 
her when the accused persons came to know that M’s loved 
ones had filed a complaint regarding her being kidnapped. On 
appeal from a judgment of conviction returned by the Madurai 
Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Madras, this Court 
examined the proper method for determining a victim’s age 
under Section 94(2) of the JJ Act The statute established a 
clear hierarchy of documents: first, a matriculation or equivalent 
school certificate showing the date of birth; second, a birth 
certificate issued by a municipal corporation or panchayat; 
and third only if these were unavailable could a medical 
or ossification test be relied upon. In the present case, the 
only document produced was a school Transfer Certificate 
indicating the date of birth as 11th July1997. However, this 
Certificate was not one of the documents prescribed by the 
Section. Moreover, the Transfer Certificate was produced by 
a court summoned witness rather than the prosecution, and 
the Revenue official confirmed that official birth records for 
1997 were missing. Consequently, the Transfer Certificate 
could not establish that the victim was under 18 years of age 
at the relevant time.
16.1.1	 The Court cited precedents, including Rishipal Singh 
Solanki (supra) and Sanjeev Kumar Gupta (supra), to 
reaffirm the statutory hierarchy i.e., only in the absence 
30	
2023 SCC OnLine SC 846
31	
2025 INSC 737

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
813
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
of matriculation/school certificates or municipal birth 
records could medical agedetermination be used. In the 
facts, it was observed, the headmaster (DW2) admitted 
that the date of birth in the school record was based on 
a horoscope rather than an independent verification, 
and no official birth register existed to support it.
16.1.2	 Since the documents presented did not fall within the 
first two categories under Section 94(2), the Court 
held that the prosecution should rely on the medical 
ossification test. The doctor (PW9) conducted such a 
test, concluding that the victim’s age was “more than 18 
years and less than 20 years,” with crossexamination 
confirming the possibility of age being 19 years. The 
Court below had discounted this medical evidence, 
holding that the school record alone could determine 
age, but that reasoning was rejected, emphasizing 
that the Transfer Certificate did not meet the statutory 
standard.
16.1.3	 Ultimately, the Court concluded that the only acceptable 
evidence on age was the medical ossification report, 
which indicated that the victim was above 18 years. 
As a result, the prosecution failed to prove that the 
victim was a “child” under the POCSO Act, meaning 
the statutory age requirement for the offence was not 
satisfied. He was, therefore, acquitted. 
16.2	 In Rajni, the juvenility of her son, Respondent No.2, was the 
central question and arose in the context of his being made 
an accused in connection with Crime No. 80/2021 registered 
before the Medical College Police Station, Meerut under 
Sections 302/201/34 of the IPC as well as Crime Case No. 
97/ 2021 registered before the same police station under 
Sections 3/25/27 of the Arms Act, 1959. Rajni’s application 
to have her son dealt with as a minor was rejected by the 
JJB, and the case eventually made its way up the judicial 
hierarchy, to this Court. 
16.2.1	 The respondent produced a School Certificate from 
DPS Higher Secondary School, Parvesh Vihar, Meerut, 
showing his date of birth as 8th September 2003. 

814
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
This Certificate, along with the admission date of 4th 
April 2016 and the High School passing year 2018, 
suggested that the respondent was about 17 years 
and 3 months old at the time of the incident. Notably, 
an earlier proceeding (Miscellaneous Case No.9/2000) 
had already accepted the same date of birth.
16.2.2	 However, the JJB was skeptic about these documents, 
noting that records from Class 4 to Class 8 had been 
destroyed in a fire, and the respondent’s mother could 
not recall the school’s name. The school principal 
confirmed that original records for those classes were 
missing. In addition, the JJB rejected the municipal birth 
certificate from the concerned municipal corporation, 
which also indicated 8th September 2003, on the 
grounds that it had been issued on 8th June 2020 that 
is, after the incident. As a result, a medical examination 
of the respondent was ordered to determine his age.
16.2.3	 The Court held this approach to be incorrect in view of 
the clear stipulation under Section 94(2) of the JJ Act. 
Here, both the municipal birth certificate and the school 
certificate were available, and both corroborated the 
earlier JJB decision. By disregarding these documents 
and relying on a medical test, the JJB had erred. The 
Additional District & Sessions Judge rightly reversed 
the JJB’s decision, giving precedence to the school 
certificate and declaring the respondent a juvenile.
16.2.4	 The Court also emphasized that the JJB could not 
challenge its earlier acceptance of the date of birth 
simply because the mother or informant was not a 
party in the prior proceeding. The JJB does not have 
the power to review its earlier decision under the 
JJ Act, and the earlier acceptance of 8th September 
2003 should be binding. Consequently, the High Court 
upheld the Additional District & Sessions Judge’s ruling 
and affirmed the date of birth reflected in the school 
certificate.
16.2.5	 The Court referred to precedents such as Rishipal 
Singh Solanki (supra) which clarified that juvenility 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
815
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
can be claimed at any stage, and that initial burden lies 
on the claimant. Documents like school certificates or 
municipal birth certificates are prima facie sufficient to 
establish juvenility, while medical tests cannot serve as 
the sole criterion. When evidence is borderline, Courts 
are to lean in favor of juvenility, although misuse must 
be guarded against.
16.2.6	 The discussion continued by distinguishing prior 
cases where medical tests were relied upon when 
documentary evidence was unreliable. In contrast, 
the present case involved consistent documentary 
evidence - the school certificate, municipal certificate, 
and earlier JJB decision - all supporting the date of 
birth as 8th September 2003. The JJB’s reasoning that 
the informant was not a party in the earlier proceeding 
was found to be unsound. The Additional District & 
Sessions Judge had correctly reversed the JJB’s 
approach, and the High Court had rightly affirmed that 
the respondent should be treated as a juvenile at the 
time of the incident.
17.	 The necessary sequitur from the above exposition is that a medical 
determination of age of a victim cannot be resorted to as a matter 
of course, much less mandated. It can only be employed in a given 
circumstance when the other stipulations of Section 94 JJ Act are 
not/cannot be met. This direction, therefore, has to be set aside. 
Summation 
18.	 In fine, our conclusions are that the High Court in bail jurisdiction was 
coram non judice for issuing directions mandating the investigating 
authorities within the State of Uttar Pradesh to necessarily have 
a medical examination of the victim conducted, with the particular 
intent to determine the age of the victim as also holding, that a bail 
Court would be empowered to entertain challenges to the documents 
produced to establish the age of the victim The importance of medical 
examination in the harrowing crimes of sexual assault cannot be 
overstated, it is not merely a record of injury or a catalogue of 
biological traces; it is the voice of the body, speaking when words 
falter and memory trembles. In cases where the victim’s courage 

816
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
may be tested by stigma, shame, or the weight of societal scrutiny, 
medical evidence provides an impartial testament, grounding the 
pursuit of justice in the certainty of observable fact. It is, in essence, 
the bridge that links the personal suffering of the victim with the 
impartial adjudication of the law. But at the same time, its purpose, 
which is to gather essential evidence in a scientifically sound manner, 
with due regard to the principles of human dignity on one hand and 
evidence on the other, cannot be reduced to a common, matter of 
course step - especially when a procedure with a legislative imprimatur 
has been laid down. The Court could not have passed directions 
that go against clearly stated legislative intent under Section 94 of 
the JJ Act. The determination of the age of the victim is a matter 
for trial, and the presumption which is accorded to the documents 
enumerated under the Section, has to be rebutted there, for that is 
the appropriate forum to do so, not the bail Court. If the question 
of age is raised at the stage of bail, it is only open for the Court to, 
from the perusal of the documents, take a prima facie view as to 
the age of the victim, not one on the correctness of the documents 
since that would amount to a mini trial. It could also not have fused 
statutory jurisdiction with a constitutional one, lifting one to the other, 
or downgrading the higher to the lower in order to grant itself the 
wherewithal, in an otherwise fairly circumscribed jurisdiction, to do 
what could not be done. 
A Necessitated Post-Script
19.	 As the conclusions drawn above indicate the impugned judgment 
and order of the High Court has to be set aside on grounds of 
transgression of the jurisdiction present and thereby lacking the 
appropriate directions. It is to be set aside also because it goes 
against the statutory prescription under the JJ Act. Be that as it 
may, this Court has not lost sight of the well-intentioned purport of 
this order. The POCSO Act is one of the most solemn articulations 
of justice aimed at protecting the children of today and the leaders 
of tomorrow. Yet, when an instrument of such noble and one may 
even say basic good intent is misused, misapplied and used as 
a tool for exacting revenge, the notion of justice itself teeters on 
the edge of inversion. Courts have in many cases sounded alarm 
regarding this situation. Misuse of the POCSO Act highlights a grim 
societal chasm - on the one end children are silenced by fear and 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
817
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
their families are constrained by poverty or stigma, meaning thereby 
that justice remains distant and uncertain, and on the other hand, 
those equipped with privilege, literacy, social and monetary capital 
are able to manipulate the law to their advantage. The impugned 
judgment is one amongst many where Courts have spoken out. Not 
only are instances rife where the age of the victim is misrepresented 
to make the incident fall under the stringent provisions of this law 
but also there are numerous instances where this law is used by 
families in opposition to relationships between young people. In 
Satish alias Chand v. State of U.P.32, the High Court, noted that 
on few occasions concern had been expressed by the Court with 
respect to application of the Act on consenting adolescence when it 
comes to consensual relationships between teenagers, four factors 
have been highlighted which, is crucial for the Courts to consider: 
“A. Assess the Context: Each case should be evaluated 
on its individual facts and circumstances. The nature of 
the relationship and the intentions of both parties should 
be carefully examined. 
B. Consider Victim’s Statement: The statement of the 
alleged victim should be given due consideration. If the 
relationship is consensual and based on mutual affection, 
this should be factored into decisions regarding bail and 
prosecution. 
C. Avoid Perversity of Justice: Ignoring the consensual 
nature of a relationship can lead to unjust outcomes, such 
as wrongful imprisonment. The judicial system should aim 
to balance the protection of minors with the recognition of 
their autonomy in certain contexts. Here the age comes 
out to be an important factor. 
D. Judicial Discretion: Courts should use their discretion 
wisely, ensuring that the application of POCSO does 
not inadvertently harm the very individuals it is meant to 
protect.”
[See also: Mrigraj Gautam @ Rippu v. State of U.P.]33
32	
Crl.Misc.Bail Appl.No.18596 of 2024
33	
2023:AHC:204171

818
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
The Delhi High Court in Sahil v. the State NCT of Delhi34 the Court 
noted in para 11 of the order that POCSO cases filed at the behest 
of a girl’s family objecting to romantic involvement with a young boy 
have become common place and consequent thereto these young 
boys languish in jails. Therein, reference is also made to an order 
of the Gujarat High Court35, where the Court noted that considering 
the closeness in age of the prosecutrix and the accused as also 
the fact that she had left home of her own accord observed that the 
application deserved consideration. 
This chasm between access and abuse is also mirrored in the misuse 
of Section 498-A IPC and the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. Amongst 
numerous examples, we may only refer to Rajesh Chaddha v. 
State of U.P36, where this Court lamented the use of these Sections 
without specific instances or relevant details, among other cases. 
It is also to be stated though that no amount of judicial vigilance 
against misuse can alone bridge this ever-widening gap. The first line 
of defence lies with the Bar i.e., the body that translates grievance 
into action and is the gatekeeper of justice at the point of entry. 
When it comes to matters such as these, the responsibility of the 
advocate is profound – to examine the allegations with detachment 
and necessary discretion and to counsel restraint when grievance 
masks vengeance and to refuse participation in litigation when it can 
be seen that an ulterior motive is sought to be agitated under the 
guise of seeking protection of the law. It is only when the Bar takes 
a principled, proactive role, that the legislation intended as a shield 
can be stopped from being twisted into a weapon. A lawyer who 
tempers aggression with calm, reason and rationality, protects not 
only the opposing party from unwarranted harm but also the client 
from the long-term consequences of frivolous or malicious litigation, 
including adverse orders, and judicial censure. By taking a principled 
stand, the Bar acts as a crucial filter, preventing the legal system from 
being overwhelmed by abuse masquerading as enforcement. Such 
self-regulation strengthens public faith in the profession, ensures 
that judicial time is reserved for genuine disputes, and reinforces 
the foundational idea that law is a means of justice, not a weapon 
34	
2024:DHC:6100
35	
Jayantibhai Babulbhai Alani v. State of Gujarat 2018 SCC Online Guj. 1223
36	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1094

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
819
The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Anurudh & Anr
of convenience. In this sense, the ethical vigilance of lawyers is not 
ancillary to justice, it is indispensable to it. When they do not do 
so, the chasm alluded to above widens. Society also must match 
institutional reform with moral awakening. The intent and object of 
these legislations must be at the forefront when a person wishes 
to lodge a complaint thereunder. The misuse of these laws is a 
mirror to the opportunistic and self-centered view that pervades the 
application of law. It is only through discipline, integrity and courage 
that these problems can be remedied and rooted out. Any legislative 
amendment or judicial direction will remain lack-luster without this 
deeper change. 
We have referred to certain instances of the High Courts noting the 
misuse/misapplication of the POCSO Act, somewhat in line with the 
indices appended to the impugned judgment as also its progenitors. 
Considering the fact that repeated judicial notice has been taken of 
the misuse of these laws, let a copy of this judgment be circulated to 
the Secretary, Law, Government of India, to consider initiation of steps 
as may be possible to curb this menace inter alia, the introduction of 
a Romeo – Juliet clause exempting genuine adolescent relationships 
from the stronghold of this law; enacting a mechanism enabling the 
prosecution of those persons who, by the use of these laws seeks 
to settle scores etc. 
20.	 In that view of the matter, we pass the following order:
(a)	 The appeal is allowed. The directions issued in the impugned 
judgment are set aside. 
(b)	 In view of ‘III)’ as extracted in para 5.6 as also in view of their 
intrinsic connection, such effect will extend to Aman (supra) 
and Manish (supra)
(c)	
The bail granted in terms of these judgments and orders, is 
left undisturbed in view of the other factors considered by the 
learned Single Judge subject to judicial review, if any. 
(d)	 Insofar as the cases listed in the appendices to these judgments 
are concerned, this Court refrains from making any comment. 
The effect of this judgment will be prospective and shall not 
therefore, impact negatively, any of those cases wherein, 
following the procedure laid down in the impugned judgment 
or its progenitors, bail has been secured. 

820
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(e)	 The Registrar (Judicial) is directed to dispatch forthwith a copy 
of this judgment to the learned Registrar General, High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad, for necessary follow-up action, as 
also information to the Trial Courts.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
