[2026] 1 S.C.R. 740 : 2026 INSC 37
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption 
Bureau, A.P. & Anr. Etc.
v.
Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
(Criminal Appeal No(s). 122-134 of 2026)
08 January 2026
[M.M. Sundresh* and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
A set of cases where, the FIRs registered, for offences punishable 
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 have been quashed, 
which left the investigation(s) being nipped in the bud in some 
cases, while, in the others, criminal proceedings stood terminated. 
The High Court has undertaken the said exercise, solely on the 
issue of jurisdiction of the police station which registered the FIRs.
Headnotes†
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 – Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 – s.2(s) – Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023 – Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 – FIRs were 
registered at the office of the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Central 
Investigation Unit, Andhra Pradesh, Vijayawada Police Station, 
between the years 2016 and 2020, for offences punishable 
under the PC Act – All these FIRs were challenged by the 
persons arrayed as accused, respondent(s) herein, primarily 
on the ground that the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Central 
Investigation Unit, Andhra Pradesh, Vijayawada Police Station, 
is not notified as a police station u/s.2(s) of the CrPC, 1973 
and, therefore, lacks jurisdiction to register the FIRs – By 
the impugned judgment, the High Court held that, in the 
absence of a notification u/s.2(s) of the CrPC, 1973, the 
police station, to which the police officers who registered the 
FIRs belong to, do not have any jurisdiction to register the 
same – Accordingly, all the registered FIRs were quashed, 
without even indicating which forum would otherwise have 
the jurisdiction – Correctness:
Held: The approach of the High Court has caused travesty of 
justice – If, on a hyper-technical ground, the FIRs are quashed, 
* Author

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
741
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
the High Court is duty-bound to lay down the law with respect 
to the jurisdiction that otherwise exists – The High Court has 
completely misdirected itself while interpreting the law, including 
the principles laid down by this Court in Swarn Rekha Cokes 
& Coals (P). Ltd. – Though this decision has been overruled, 
paragraphs 26 to 28, contained thereunder, have been affirmed 
by the subsequent decision of this Court in the case of State of 
Madhya Pradesh and Others – The reasoning of the High Court, 
that a declaration by way of a notification has to be published 
in the Official Gazette for due compliance of s.2(s) of the CrPC, 
1973, is unacceptable – Similarly, the finding, that the subsequent 
clarificatory Government Order of 2022 will not have an effect on 
the FIRs registered, is totally untenable and against the basic 
canons of law – When a Government Order is issued by way of a 
clarification, there is no question of any retrospective application – 
In fact, the said Government Order merely quotes the various 
provisions of the 2014 Act in order to make the position abundantly 
clear – This Court took the earlier judgments into consideration 
and, in fact, dealt with the very same 2014 Act and held that the 
legal fiction should be so that the existing laws, prior to bifurcation, 
would continue to be in force in both the States, unless altered, 
repealed or amended in accordance with law – Any construction 
to the contrary would defeat the very intent and purpose of the 
Government Orders, which were given the status of ‘law,’ vide 
Circular dated 26.05.2014 – Thus, the impugned judgment is 
set aside – The appellant(s) are at liberty to proceed with the 
investigation – However, the appellant(s) directed not take any 
coercive steps by way of arresting the respondents herein – The 
respondents herein directed to co-operate with the expeditious 
conclusion of the investigation – The High Court not to entertain 
any more challenge to the FIRs or the pending investigation. 
[Paras 22-24, 26, 27, 29]
Case Law Cited
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes Ranchi and Another v. Swarn 
Rekha Cokes & Coals (P) Ltd. and Others [2004] Supp. 2 SCR 
633 : (2004) 6 SCC 689; State of Madhya Pradesh and Others v. 
Lafarge Dealers Association and Others [2019] 18 SCR 924 : 
(2019) 7 SCC 584; State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. A. 
Satish Kumar and Others [2025] 1 SCR 130 : AIR 2025 Supreme 
Court 913 – relied on.

742
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
State of Punjab and Others v. Balbir Singh and Others [1976] 2 
SCR 115 : (1976) 3 SCC 242; Ranjan Sinha and Another v. Ajay 
Kumar Vishwakarma and Others [2017] 7 SCR 194 : (2017) 14 
SCC 774 – referred to.
List of Acts
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988; Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973; Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2014.
List of Keywords
Hyper-technical ground; Section 2(s) of CrPC; Section 2(o) of CrPC; 
Pari Materia; Official Gazette Notification; Section 2(f) of Andhra 
Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014; Section 100 of Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2014; Continuity of Laws; Travesty of Justice; 
Clarificatory Notification; Substance over Form; Disproportionate 
Assets; Investigation.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No(s). 
122-134 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.08.2025 of the High Court 
of Andhra Pradesh at Amravati in CRLP Nos. 3955, 197, 433, 1376, 
2211, 2253, 2451, 3808, and 4831 of 2021, and CRLP Nos. 4469, 
5958, and 5985 of 2020, and CRLP No. 2066 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Sidharth Luthra, Siddharth Aggarwal, Sr. Advs., Ms. Prerna Singh, 
Guntur Pramod Kumar, Dhruv Yadav, Ms. Rajni Gupta, Vishwajeet 
Singh, Karl P Rustomkhan, Parv Arora.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Dr. Sofia Begum, Guru Krishnakumar, Sr. Advs., Mrs. Gouri Karuna 
Mohanti, Ms. Anu Gupta, Veerla Sateesh Kumar, Deepak Kumar 
Singh, Ms. Puspa Kishore, Sujeet Kumar Gupta, Satendra Kumar, 
Ms. Mansa Singh, Ms. Sangeeta Gaur, Ms. Shubra Shah, Pradeep 
Kumar Shah, Dharmavath Ravi, Anugu Ushi Reddy, Sriram P., 
S Ragasandesh, Ms. Anu Gupta, Sriram P., Bhushan Mahendra 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
743
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
Oza, Ms. Nidhi Mittal, C. K. Sasi, Sulakshan Vs, Agnish Aditya, 
Vishesh Goel, Ms. Nidhi Mittal, Suresh Babu, Navin Suresh, C. K. 
Sasi, Dr. Kk Geetha, Ms. Meena K Poulose, Suresh Babu, Navin 
Suresh, C. K. Sasi, Dr. Kk Geetha, Ms. Meena K Poulose.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
M.M. Sundresh, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Heard the learned Senior Counsel and learned Counsel appearing for 
the appellant(s) and respondent(s). We have perused the documents 
placed before us, along with the written submissions made.
3.	
A helping hand, extended by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh 
through a hyper-technical approach, in nullifying the First Information 
Reports (hereinafter referred to as “FIRs”) registered in a batch of 
cases, pertaining to offences committed under the provisions of the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the “PC 
Act”), which left the investigation(s) being nipped in the bud in some 
cases, while, in the others, criminal proceedings stood terminated, 
led to the present appeals being filed before us.
DISCUSSION OF RELEVANT LEGAL PROVISIONS, GOVERNMENT 
ORDERS AND CIRCULARS:
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973
4.	
The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as 
the “CrPC, 1973”) was replaced by the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter referred to as the “BNSS, 2023”). As the 
relevant provisions, in both the Statutes, are pari materia, we would 
only deal with the former enactment for the sake of brevity.
Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973:
“2. Definitions.—In this Code, unless the context 
otherwise requires,— 
***

744
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(s) “police station” means any post or place declared 
generally or specially by the State Government, to be 
a police station, and includes any local area specified 
by the State Government in this behalf;”
(emphasis supplied)
Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973 defines a ‘police station’. It concerns 
itself with two distinct and separate categories, namely, ‘post’ and 
‘place’ Accordingly, a ‘post,’ held by a police officer, can be defined 
as a police station, and so also a ‘place’. In a given case, there can 
be a combination of both. The definition clause, under Section 2(s) 
of the CrPC, 1973, is both exhaustive and inclusive. It is exhaustive 
to mean, any post or any place, while it includes any local area 
specified by the State Government. The inclusion of ‘local area’ 
would come within the definition of place, meaning thereby, a place 
would include, a specified one, a town, a city, a taluk, a village, a 
district or even a State itself. Therefore, a local area is a species 
of the genus ‘place’. The declaration, that is warranted, under the 
definition clause, is rather formal. It can be specific, either to a place 
or to a post, or general, to a group of posts or places. Suffice it is 
to state that, under the definition, there need not be a specific place 
to be declared as a police station, as even a post being held by a 
police officer would constitute a police station.
Section 2(o) of the CrPC, 1973:
“2. Definitions.—In this Code, unless the context 
otherwise requires,— 
***
(o) “officer in charge of a police station” includes, when 
the officer in charge of the police station is absent from 
the station-house or unable from illness or other cause to 
perform his duties, the police officer present at the station-
house who is next in rank to such officer and is above 
the rank of constable or, when the State Government so 
directs, any other police officer so present;”
This provision defines an “officer in charge of a police station.” This 
is an inclusive definition, which refers to a police officer at the station 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
745
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
house, placed next in rank to the officer in charge, and is above the 
rank of constable, unless the State Government otherwise so directs. 
G.O.Ms. No. 268 HOME (PSC) DEPARTMENT dated 12.09.2003
5.	
The Government of Andhra Pradesh issued a notification, by way 
of the aforesaid Government Order, declaring the offices of Anti-
Corruption Bureau (A.C.B) as Police Stations, with their respective 
jurisdiction.
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH
ABSTRACT
Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra Pradesh - Declaration of 
Offices of Anti-Corruption Bureau of Police Stations with 
their jurisdiction. Notification - Issued.
HOME (PSC) DEPARTMENT
G.O.Ms.No. 268. 
Dated: 12-9-2003
Letter C.No. 51/RPCC/2002 dated 7-6-2002 of the 
Director General, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra 
Pradesh, Hyderabad.
ORDER: -
The following Notification will be published in Andhra 
Pradesh Gazette, dated - 2003
NOTIFICATION
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (s) of section 
2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 2 of 1974) 
and in supersession of all posts of all previous orders on the 
subject, the Governor of Andhra Pradesh hereby declares 
that the offices of the Anti-Corruption Bureau specified in 
the schedule shown below in column (2) shall be Police 
Stations and that they shall include within their limits, the 
areas specified in column (3) against each of the offices 
and in exercise of the powers conferred under clause 
(o) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(Central Act 2 of 1974) declares that all Police Officers 
of the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra Pradesh, of and 

746
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
above the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police shall 
be officer in charge of a Police Station, and in the absence 
of such Police Officer from the Station House, or unable 
from illness, or other cause to perform his duties, the 
police Officer at the Station House, who is next in rank to 
such officer i.e., Inspector of Police shall be the Officer in 
charge of the Police Station.
11.
Joint Director, 
Central Investigating Unit, 
A.C.B., Hyderabad
State of Andhra 
Pradesh
Upon understanding the definition clauses contained in Sections 2(s) 
and 2(o) of the CrPC, 1973, the aforestated notification has been 
passed. This notification contains two distinct parts. In exercise of 
powers contained under Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973, the offices of 
the Anti-Corruption Bureau, specified in the Schedule, as mentioned 
in Column (2), have been declared as police stations. Therefore, 
what has been declared is the office concerned. After undertaking 
the said exercise, a further declaration has been made in exercise 
of powers conferred under Section 2(o) of the CrPC, 1973, declaring 
all police officers of the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra Pradesh, of 
and above the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, as in-charge 
of the police station. The Government Order further facilitates the 
other officers to exercise the said power, on a contingency, in tune 
with the said provision. Further, vide Serial No. 11, the Office of the 
Joint Director, Central Investigating Unit, A.C.B., Hyderabad was 
declared as a police station, with jurisdiction over the entire State 
of Andhra Pradesh. Suffice it is to state that this Government Order, 
having the trappings of law, continues to govern the field.
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2014
6.	
Pursuant to a conscious decision, the Government of India enacted 
the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (hereinafter referred 
to as the “2014 Act”), carving out a new State, namely, the State of 
Telangana, through the bifurcation of the undivided State of Andhra 
Pradesh on 01.03.2014. The Act came into force with effect from 
the appointed date i.e., 02.06.2014. The following provisions would 
be apposite to refer to:

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
747
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
Section 2(f) of the 2014 Act 
“2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
***
(f) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, 
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument 
having, immediately before the appointed day, the force 
of law in the whole or in any part of the existing State of 
Andhra Pradesh;”
Section 100 of the 2014 Act
“100. Territorial extent of laws.—The provisions of 
Part II shall not be deemed to have affected any change 
in the territories to which the Andhra Pradesh Land 
Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973 
(Andhra Pradesh Act No. 1 of 1973) and any other 
law in force immediately before the appointed day 
extends or applies, and territorial references in any 
such law to the State of Andhra Pradesh shall, until 
otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or 
other competent authority be construed as meaning 
the territories within the existing State of Andhra 
Pradesh before the appointed day.”
(emphasis supplied)
Section 101 of the 2014 Act
“101. Power to adapt laws.—For the purpose of facilitating 
the application in relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh 
or the State of Telangana of any law made before the 
appointed day, the appropriate Government may, before 
the expiration of two years from that day, by order, make 
such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether 
by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary 
or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have 
effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so 
made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority.

748
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “appropriate 
Government” means as respects any law relating to a matter 
enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government, 
and as respects any other law in its application to a State, 
the State Government.” 
(emphasis supplied)
Section 102 of the 2014 Act
“102. Power to construe laws.—Notwithstanding 
that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 102 for the adaptation of a law 
made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law 
may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in 
relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of 
Telangana, construe the law in such manner, without 
affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper 
in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or 
authority.”
(emphasis supplied)
7.	
The definition of the term ‘law’, under Section 2(f) of the 2014 Act, is 
an expansive one, as it includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, 
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having 
the force of law, in existence. Thus, the term ‘law’ includes an order or 
other instrument having the force of law, and therefore, brings within 
its ambit a notification or a circular issued by a competent authority.
8.	
On a reading of Section 100 of the 2014 Act, one can see the objective 
behind it. This is a transitional provision, making the application of 
the existing law to the two States, conscious enough not to create 
any legal vacuum. The abovesaid objective is also evident on a 
reading of Sections 101 and 102 of the 2014 Act.
9.	
Section 101 of the 2014 Act mainly gives the option to the appropriate 
Government of the State either to adapt, modify, repeal or amend 
the existing law. Section 102 of the 2014 Act goes one step further 
by facilitating the Courts and Tribunals to give effect to the existing 
law, notwithstanding the lack of adoption of the erstwhile law.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
749
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
10.	 The abovesaid provisions would make it clear that there is indeed 
no requirement for any specific order of adoption, particularly for 
the State of Andhra Pradesh. In other words, the State of Andhra 
Pradesh continues to be the same State, as what has been done 
is, by merely carving out some of its territories, a new State has 
been created. In any case, Section 102 of the 2014 Act leaves no 
room for any other interpretation, especially when it contains a non-
obstante clause, and facilitates the Tribunals and the Courts to follow 
the existing law, even in the absence of any adoption. Hence, when 
the Courts are expected to follow the existing law, it is axiomatic 
that the mandate applies to the executive and every other authority. 
Circular Memo No. 13665/SR/2014 
11.	 To make the aforesaid position rather clear, a Circular was issued by 
the Government of Andhra Pradesh, vide Circular Memo No.13665/
SR/2014 dated 26.05.2014, by taking note of the law, as laid down 
by this Court, in State of Punjab and Others vs. Balbir Singh and 
Others (1976) 3 SCC 242 and Commissioner of Commercial Taxes 
Ranchi and Another vs. Swarn Rekha Cokes & Coals (P) Ltd. and 
Others (2004) 6 SCC 689. The correct understanding of the 2014 
Act, as reflected in the aforesaid Circular, is placed hereunder for 
better appreciation. 
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH GENERAL 
ADMINISTRATION (SR) DEPARTMENT
Circular Memo.No.13665/SR/2014.  Dated: 26-5-2014
Sub: The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act,2014 - 
Formation of a new State to be known as the State of 
Telangana – Application of ‘law’ in the States - Clarification - 
Reg.
Ref: The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
*******
In terms of section 3 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation 
Act, 2014 (Central Act 6 of 2014), a new State to be 
known as the State of Telangana comprising the territories 
specified therein shall be formed on and from the appointed 
day, and the appointed day has been notified as 2-6-2014. 

750
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2. In this connection, it is stated that “law” as defined in 
section 2(f) of the Act is as follows:- 
“(f) ‘law’ includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, 
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other Instrument 
having, immediately before the appointed day, the force 
of law in the whole or in any part of the existing State of 
Andhra Pradesh.” 
3. In so far as the territorial extent of laws, power to adapt 
laws and power to construe laws are concerned the relevant 
provisions under the Act are as in sections 100, 101 and 
102, which are as follows:- 
“100. The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed 
to have affected any change in the territories to 
which the Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Celling 
on Agricultural Holdings) Act, 1973 and any other 
law in force immediately before the appointed day 
extends or applies, and territorial references in any 
such law to the State of Andhra Pradesh shall, until 
otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or 
other competent authority be construed as meaning 
the territories within the existing State of Andhra 
Pradesh before the appointed day. 
101. For the purpose of facilitating the application 
in relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the 
State of Telangana of any law made before the 
appointed day, the appropriate Government may, 
before the expiration of two years from that day, by 
order, make such adaptations and modifications of 
the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as 
may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every 
such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations 
and modifications so made until altered, repealed 
or amended by a competent Legislature or other 
competent authority. 
Explanation:- In this section, the expression 
“appropriate Government” means as respects any 
law relating to matter enumerated in the Union List, 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
751
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
the Central Government, and as respects any other 
law in its application to a State, the State Government. 
102. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient 
provision has been made under section 102 for the 
adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, 
any court, tribunal or authority, required or empowered 
to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating 
its application in relation to the State of Andhra 
Pradesh or the State of Telangana, construe the law 
in such manner, without affecting the substance, as 
may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter 
before the court, tribunal or authority.”
4. In this connection, it is stated that in State of Punjab and 
others Vs Balbir Singh and others [(1976) 3 SCC 242: AIR 
1977 SC 629], the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India inter 
alia held that when there is no change of sovereignty and 
it is merely an adjustment of territories by reorganization 
of a particular State, the administrative orders made by 
the Government of erstwhile State continue to be in force 
and effective and binding on the successor States until 
and unless they are modified, changed or repudiated by 
the Governments of the successor States. It has also been 
observed that no other view is possible to be taken, as 
that will merely bring about chaos in the administration 
of new States. 
5. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the Commissioner 
of Commercial Tax Ranchi and another Vs Swarn Rekha 
Cokes & Coals Private Limited and others, reported 
in (2004) 5 SCALE 596, while interpreting the true 
meaning and import of sections 84 and 85 of the Bihar 
Reorganisation Act, 2000 (which are on the identical lines 
of sections 100 and 101 of the A.P. Reorganisation Act, 
2014), inter alia held that the language in these sections 
is clear and unambiguous. These sections provide that 
the laws which were applicable to the undivided State of 
Bihar would continue to apply to the new States created 
by the Act. The laws that operated continue to operate 
notwithstanding the bifurcation of the erstwhile State of 

752
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Bihar and creation of the new State of Jharkhand. They 
continue in force until and unless altered, repealed or 
amended. 
6. In view of the above, it is clarified that—
(i) all the laws, which were applicable to the undivided 
State of Andhra Pradesh, as on 1-6-2014, would continue 
to apply to the new States i.e., State of Telangana and 
State of Andhra Pradesh created by the Central Act, with 
effect from 2-6-2014 notwithstanding the bifurcation of the 
erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh; 
(ii) to facilitate their application in respect of the State 
of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh, the 
appropriate Government may, before the expiration of two 
years from 2-6-2014, by order, make such adaptations 
and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal 
or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient; and 
thereupon, 
(iii) every such law as adapted or modified as above, will 
continue till such time it is altered, repealed or amended 
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, 
in the respective States. 
Circular Memo No.25735/GPM&AR/2015 
12.	 The Circular referred to above, issued by way of a clarification, 
was followed by another one, vide Circular Memo No.25735/
GPM&AR/2015 dated 01.12.2015, meant for administrative purposes 
relating to the shifting of the Secretariat, which is as follows:
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION (GPM&AR) 
DEPARTMENT 
Circular Memo No. 25735/GPM&AR/2015. 
Dated. 
01.12.2015 
Sub: Shifting of Secretariat, Heads of Departments to New 
Capital Region - Instructions – Reg.
@@@

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
753
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
All the Departments of Secretariat, Heads of Departments 
are hereby informed that Secretariat and HODs will function 
from the New Capital Region from 1st June, 2016. All the 
Department of Secretariat and Heads of Departments are 
requested to plan and arrange for shifting to the New Capital 
Region before 1st June, 2016. They are also requested to 
issue instructions to all the employees and officers working 
in their respective department under their administrative 
control that the offices will function from the New Capital 
Region from 1st June, 2016 onwards. 
Circular Memo. No. 53023/6/GPM&AR/2016-9
13.	 The said Circular was followed by a subsequent Circular dated 
24.05.2016. The same reads as follows:
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
GENERAL ADMINISTRATION (GPM&AR) 
DEPARTMENT
***
Circular Memo. No. 53023/6/GPM&AR/2016-9.  Dated. 
24/05/2016
Sub: GPM&AR — Shifting of HoDs and other Institutions 
to the new Capital Region – Instructions—Issued. 
***
It has been decided by the Government to move all the 
Heads of Departments and other Government Institutions 
like Societies, Non-Statutory Authorities, Institutions other 
than listed in IX and X Schedules of A.P. Re-organisation 
Act on or before 27th June 2016 to the new Capital region 
and in and around Vijayawada and Guntur cities. 
2. All the Heads of Departments shall first explore the 
possibility of locating their Offices in any of the Government 
building owned by the Department in the new capital 
region. If there is no suitable Government building available 
with the Department, they are requested to approach 
the District Collector, Krishna/ Guntur and obtain private 
accommodation details available with him. They may select 

754
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the premises and fix the rent for the private building. The 
Dist. Collectors, Krishna and Guntur will provide necessary 
support and guidance in this regard. 
3. The Dist. Collector, Krishna has identified a total 
number of 85 buildings with a plinth area of 16,98,231 sft 
with ample parking place of 2,34,000 SFT in and around 
Vijayawada which are now available for ready occupation. 
Similarly the Dist. Collector, Guntur also identified 4 private 
accommodation in and around Guntur city roughly about 
1,50,000 SFT for accommodating the Govt. Offices. (The 
particulars of the building along with the photograph has 
been scanned and any of the Head of the Departments 
desires to have the soft copy can send a mail request to 
splcsgad@ap.gov.in). 
4. After identification of suitable building, the Department 
should enter into a lease agreement for a period about 3 
years. If the department is constructing any building, lease 
period can be of shorter duration considering with building 
completion date. After the building is taken on lease, Heads 
of Department should move along with the existing office 
furniture and office equipment available in Hyderabad 
Office and start functioning from the new premises at the 
new capital region. The entire shifting exercise should be 
completed before 27th June, 2016 and ensure that the 
functioning of the offices from the New Capital Region 
shall be commenced from 27.06.2016. 
5. All the Departments of Secretariat / HoDs are 
requested to issue suitable instructions to the Government 
instrumentalities working under their control immediately. 
6. This copy of the circular instructions is also available 
on internet and can be accessed at www.ap.gov.in. 
C.No.3/A3/2014-16 dated 17.10.2016
14.	 After receipt of the said Circular, the Director General of the 
Anti-Corruption Bureau sent a communication intimating the due 
compliance made, vide letter dated 17.10.2016.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
755
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH 
ANTI-CORRUPTION BUREAU
From, 
To,
The Director General 
The Chief Secretary to Govt.
Anti-corruption Bureau, 
General Admn. (SC F) Dept.
2nd Floor, NTR Admn. Block, A P, Secretariat, Velagapudi,
Pandit Nehru Bus Station. 
Amaravathi
Vijayawada - 520012
C.No.3/A3/2014-16, dated 17-10-2016.
Sir, 
Sub:- Anti-Corruption Bureau - Shifting of Office to 
Vijayawada information-Regarding
Ref:- Circular Memo in No. 53023/6/GPM&AR/2016-9, 
dated 24-05-2016 of Genl. Admn. (GPM&AR) Department. 
. . .
It is to inform you that as per the orders issued by the 
Government vide reference cited, the Anti-Corruption 
Bureau has been shifted from Hyderabad to Vijayawada.
Hence, all DO letters, Confidential letters and official 
letters intended to me may be sent in my name cover to 
the following address.
Address : 
The Director General,
Anti-Corruption Bureau,
2nd Floor, NTR Admn. Block,
Pandit Nehru Bus Station.
Vijayawada - 520002
15.	 In the meanwhile, a spate of FIRs have been registered at the office 
of the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Central Investigation Unit, Andhra 
Pradesh, Vijayawada Police Station, between the years 2016 and 
2020, for offences punishable under the PC Act. All these FIRs have 
been challenged by the persons arrayed as accused, respondent(s) 
herein, primarily on the ground that the Anti-Corruption Bureau, 

756
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Central Investigation Unit, Andhra Pradesh, Vijayawada Police 
Station, is not notified as a police station under Section 2(s) of the 
CrPC, 1973 and, therefore, lacks jurisdiction to register the FIRs. 
GO.Ms. No. 137, Home (Services-III) Department dated 14.09.2022
16.	 During the pendency of the proceedings before the High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh, a clarification was issued by the Government 
of Andhra Pradesh, vide GO.Ms. No. 137, Home (Services-III) 
Department dated 14.09.2022, which states as follows:
GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH
ABSTRACT
Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra Pradesh - Declaration 
of Office of Joint Director, Central Investigation Unit, 
Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra Pradesh, Vijayawada as 
Police Station with jurisdiction over entire State of Andhra 
Pradesh - Clarification – Notification-Order-Issued 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
HOME (SERVICES-III) DEPARTMENT
G.O.Ms.No.137 
Dated. 14-09-2022 

Read the following :
1. G.O.Ms.No.268, Home (PSC) Department, dated 
12.9.2003. 
2. From the Director General, Anti-Corruption Bureau, 
А.P., Vijayawada, Letter Rc. No.43/RPC(C)/2022 dated: 
07.06.2022. 
-:0:-
ORDER: 
In the G.O. first read above, declared and notified the 
Office of the Director General, Anti-Corruption Bureau, 
Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad, as Police Station having 
jurisdiction to the combined State of Andhra Pradesh 
and also Office of the Joint Director, Central Investigation 
Unit, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Hyderabad was notified as 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
757
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
Police Station with jurisdiction over the entire State of the 
Andhra Pradesh. Pursuant to section 101 of the A.P. Re-
organisation Act, 2014 (Act No. 6 of 2014), corresponding 
notification notifying the Office of the Joint Director, Central 
Investigation Unit, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Vijayawada, as 
the Police Station having jurisdiction to the residual State of 
Andhra Pradesh has not been issued specifically. However, 
specific challenges have been taking place, to absence 
of such notification in relation to the Office of the Joint 
Director, Central Investigation Unit, Anti-Corruption Bureau, 
Vijayawada as counterpart to Joint Director, Central 
Investigation Unit, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Hyderabad, in 
relation to the State of Andhra Pradesh and the matters 
are pending in Court. In order to impart clarity to the 
subject matter, the Government hereby have clarified that 
the Office of the Joint Director, Central Investigation Unit, 
Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra Pradesh, Vijayawada, shall 
be construed as a Police Station with jurisdiction extending 
to the entire State of Andhra Pradesh, corresponding 
to the Office of the Joint Director, Central Investigation 
Unit, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Hyderabad in relation to the 
State of Telangana, even though Section 102 of the AP 
Re-Organisation Act, 2014 specifically provides for such 
consequences. 
2. Accordingly, the following Notification will be published 
in the extraordinary issue of the Andhra Pradesh Gazette, 
dated. 14-09-2022. 
NOTIFICATION
In exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (s) of 
section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(Act 2 of 1974) and in partial modification of the earlier 
orders in respect of declaration of Police Stations of the 
Central Investigation Unit, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra 
Pradesh, the Governor of Andhra Pradesh hereby declares 
that the Office of the Joint Director, Central Investigation 
Unit, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra Pradesh, Vijayawada, 
specified in the schedule shown below in column (2) shall 

758
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
be Police Station and that it shall include within the limits, 
the areas specified in column (3) against the office and 
in exercise of the powers conferred under Clause (o) of 
section 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act 
2 of 1974) declares that the Office of the Joint Director, 
Central Investigation Unit, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Andhra 
Pradesh, Vijayawada in the rank of Superintendent of Police 
shall be the officer in charge of the Police Station, and in the 
absence of such Police Officer from the Station House, or 
unable due to illness, or other cause to perform his duties, 
the Police Officer at the Station House, who is the next 
in rank to such officer i.e., Additional Superintendent of 
Police, Deputy Superintendent of Police and Inspector of 
Police shall be the Officer in charge of the Police station. 
THE SCHEDULE
Sl. No
Name of the Office
Jurisdiction
1
2
3
1.
Joint Director, Central 
Investigation Unit, 
Anti-Corruption Bureau, 
Andhra Pradesh, 
Vijayawada.
State of Andhra 
Pradesh
17.	 Before the High Court, the respondents herein contended that, in 
the absence of a notification under Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973, 
the registration of the FIRs would be one without jurisdiction and, 
therefore, liable to be quashed. Incidentally, other contentions have 
also been raised. On the contrary, the appellants herein placed 
heavy reliance upon the various Government Orders and Circulars, 
referred to above. By the impugned judgment, the High Court was 
pleased to hold that, in the absence of a notification under Section 
2(s) of the CrPC, 1973, the police station, to which the police officers 
who registered the FIRs belong to, do not have any jurisdiction to 
register the same. It was, therefore, held that there has to be a 
declaration under Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973, published by way 
of a notification in the Official Gazette, declaring a police station. 
It was further held that the Government Order, passed in GO.Ms. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
759
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
No. 137, Home (Services-III) Department dated 14.09.2022, will not 
have any retrospective application. Accordingly, all the registered 
FIRs have been quashed, without even indicating which forum would 
otherwise have the jurisdiction. 
SUBMISSIONS MADE ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS:
18.	 The learned Senior Counsel, Mr. Sidharth Luthra and Mr. Siddharth 
Aggarwal, appearing for the appellants, made the following 
submissions:
	•
In view of the mandate of the 2014 Act, with specific reference 
to Sections 101 and 102 the 2014 Act, the approach of the High 
Court cannot be sustained in the eye of the law. The Government 
Order, passed in G.O.Ms. No. 268, dated 12.09.2003, is a law 
which is binding on the parties. After the advent of the 2014 
Act, it cannot be contended that the Joint Director, Central 
Investigating Unit, A.C.B, Hyderabad would continue to have 
jurisdiction. Perhaps, he will have jurisdiction qua the State 
of Telangana. In other words, one has to see the ‘post’, as 
defined in Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973. Even prior to the 
reorganisation, the jurisdiction, of the said office, extended to 
the entire undivided State of Andhra Pradesh. Subsequent to 
the reorganisation, it should be deemed that the office, which 
stood relocated to the new capital, continues to have jurisdiction 
over the entire State.
	•
The High Court has not adopted a pragmatic approach, while 
ignoring the earlier decisions of this Court. 
	•
Reliance has been placed on the following decisions, including 
the latest one, which has already dealt with the reorganisation 
of the State of Andhra Pradesh, though on a different issue:
1.	
State of Punjab and Others vs. Balbir Singh and Others 
(1976) 3 SCC 242.
2.	
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes Ranchi and Another vs. 
Swarn Rekha Cokes & Coals (P) Ltd. and Others, (2004) 
6 SCC 689.
3.	
Ranjan Sinha and Another vs. Ajay Kumar Vishwakarma 
and Others, (2017) 14 SCC 774.

760
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
4.	
State of Madhya Pradesh and Others vs. Lafarge Dealers 
Association and Others, (2019) 7 SCC 584.
5.	
State, Central Bureau of Investigation vs A. Satish Kumar 
And Others, AIR 2025 SUPREME COURT 913.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
19.	 Learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondents, 
would submit that there has to be a notification, either general or 
specific. The State was aware of the necessity of the notification 
under Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973. The decision rendered in Swarn 
Rekha Cokes & Coals (P) Ltd. (supra) will not have an application to 
the facts of the present case, particularly when the same has been 
subsequently overruled. The State itself has understood the lacunae, 
and that is the reason why it has come out with the subsequent 
Government Order in 2022, followed by a notification, during the 
pendency of the criminal petitions before the High Court. 
20.	 Insofar as the Crime Investigation Department is concerned, 
appropriate orders have been passed by way of two Government 
Orders, being G.O.Ms No. 129 dated 02.08.2017 and G.O.Ms 
No. 8 dated 09.01.2019, specifically notifying new police stations, 
which indicate that the State of Andhra Pradesh was aware of the 
necessity of a notification under Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973. As 
the High Court has rightly interpreted the law, the appeals deserve 
to be dismissed.
DISCUSSION 
21.	 The issue before us lies in a very narrow compass. We are dealing 
with a set of cases where, the FIRs registered, for offences punishable 
under the PC Act, have been quashed, which left the investigation(s) 
being nipped in the bud in some cases, while, in the others, criminal 
proceedings stood terminated. The High Court has undertaken the 
said exercise, solely on the issue of jurisdiction of the police station 
which registered the FIRs. 
22.	 In our considered view, the approach of the High Court is nothing 
but a travesty of justice. If, on a hyper-technical ground, the FIRs 
are quashed, the High Court is duty-bound to lay down the law with 
respect to the jurisdiction that otherwise exists. We have already 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
761
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
discussed the scope and ambit of the relevant provisions contained 
in the CrPC, 1973, and the 2014 Act, which was followed by a series 
of Government Orders and Circulars. 
23.	 In fact, in our considered view, the High Court has completely 
misdirected itself while interpreting the law, including the principles 
laid down by this Court in Swarn Rekha Cokes & Coals (P). Ltd. 
(supra). Though this decision has been overruled, paragraphs 26 
to 28, contained thereunder, have been affirmed by the subsequent 
decision of this Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh and 
Others (supra). 
24.	 The reasoning of the High Court, that a declaration by way of 
a notification has to be published in the Official Gazette for due 
compliance of Section 2(s) of the CrPC, 1973, is, to say the least, 
unacceptable. One has to see the substance and due compliance, 
in spirit. Similarly, the finding, that the subsequent clarificatory 
Government Order of 2022 will not have an effect on the FIRs 
registered, is totally untenable and against the basic canons of law. 
In our considered view, the High Court took undue pains to ensure 
that the FIRs are quashed. When a Government Order is issued 
by way of a clarification, there is no question of any retrospective 
application. In fact, the said Government Order merely quotes the 
various provisions of the 2014 Act in order to make the position 
abundantly clear. As a consequence, we are dealing with a situation 
where years have lapsed without further progress on the registered 
FIRs. 
25.	 As judgments have been relied upon, in support of the respective 
contentions, we would like to deal with them.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Ranchi and Another vs. 
Swarn Rekha Cokes And Coals (P) Ltd. and Others (2004) 6 
SCC 689 
“26. The question then arises, as to what is the true 
meaning and import of Sections 84 and 85 of the Act?
27. We have earlier reproduced Sections 84 and 85 of the 
Act. As earlier noticed, Sections 3 to 6, which form part of 
Part II of the Act provide for the formation of new States 
to be known as the State of Jharkhand and the State of 
Bihar. The territories specified in Section 3 constitute the 

762
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
new State of Jharkhand and the remaining territories fall 
within the territory of the State of Bihar. However, Section 
84 in express terms, provides that the provisions of Part Il 
shall not be deemed to have effected any change in the 
territories to which any law in force immediately before 
the appointed day extended or applied and the territorial 
references in any such law to the State of Bihar shall, 
until otherwise provided by a competent legislature or 
other competent authority, be construed as meaning the 
territories within the existing State of Bihar before the 
appointed day. Section 85 provides that for the purpose of 
facilitating the application in relation to the State of Bihar 
or Jharkhand of any law made before the appointed day, 
the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of 
two years from that day, by order, make such adaptations 
and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal 
or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and 
thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to 
the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, 
repealed or amended by a competent legislature or other 
competent authority. The language in these sections 
is clear and unambiguous. These sections provide 
that the laws which were applicable to the undivided 
State of Bihar would continue to apply to the new 
States created by the Act. The laws that operated 
continue to operate notwithstanding the bifurcation 
of the erstwhile State of Bihar and creation of the new 
State of Jharkhand. They continue in force until and 
unless altered, repealed or amended. It is not disputed 
before us and indeed it cannot be disputed in view of the 
wide definition given to “law” in Section 2(f) of the Act that 
the notification issued under Section 7(3)(b) of the Bihar 
Finance Act, 1981 is law within the meaning of Sections 
84 and 85 of the Act. Thus, the notification published in the 
Bihar Gazette on 22-12-1995 bearing SO No. 478 continues 
to operate in the State of Jharkhand till such time as it 
is altered, repealed or amended. By virtue of Section 84, 
the territorial references in any such law (which includes 
the notification in question), to the State of Bihar shall be 
construed as meaning the territories within the existing 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
763
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
State of Bihar before the appointed day, until otherwise 
provided by a competent legislature or other competent 
authority. A conjoint reading of both these provisions makes 
it abundantly clear that the territorial references in any law 
in force immediately before the appointed day must be 
construed as meaning the territories within the existing 
State of Bihar before the appointed day. To facilitate their 
application in respect of the State of Bihar or Jharkhand, 
the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of 
two years from that day, by order, make such adaptations 
and modifications of the law as it may consider necessary 
or expedient by way of repeal or amendment. Till such 
law is so repealed or amended in accordance with law, 
it shall have effect. After their amendment or alteration, 
they shall have effect subject to the adaptations and 
modifications made. We, therefore, find no difficulty in 
holding that the notification of the Government of Bihar 
issued under Section 7(3)(b) of the Bihar Finance Act, 
1981 and published in the gazette on 22-12-1995 being 
SO No. 478, is law as defined by Section 2(f) of the Act. 
The said notification holds the field and applies to all the 
territories which comprised the undivided State of Bihar. 
The States of Bihar and Jharkhand have been vested with 
power to make such adaptations and modifications of the 
law as they may consider necessary or expedient. This 
they can do by issuance of order before the expiration of 
two years from the appointed day. After the adaptations 
and modifications of the law, the law shall have effect 
as so modified or adapted till such time as a competent 
legislature or other competent authority further alters, 
repeals or amends such law.
28. This is not the first time that a provision such as Section 
84 of the Act has come up for interpretation by this Court. 
Section 88 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 is also 
identically worded as Section 84 of the Act. That provision 
came up for consideration before this Court in at least 
three decisions which have been brought to our notice, 
namely, State of Punjab v. Balbir Singh (1976) 3 SCC 242, 
Sher Singh v. Financial Commr. of Planning (1987) 2 SCC 

764
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
439 and Dhayanand v. Union of India (1996) 7 SCC 47. 
In the first of these cases i.e. in State of Punjab v. Balbir 
Singh (1976) 3 SCC 242 this Court was concerned with 
an administrative order and not a law with which we are 
concerned in the instant case. Section 88 of the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act was noticed as also the definition of 
law under Section 2(g) of that Act. Section 2(g) of that Act 
did not define law as widely as it has been defined under 
Section 2(f) of the Act. This Court agreed with the High 
Court that the impugned administrative orders in question 
were not law within the meaning of Section 2(g) of that Act 
and hence, were not saved by Section 88. However, this 
Court held that when there is no change of sovereignty and 
it is merely an adjustment of territories by reorganisation 
of a particular State, the administrative orders made by 
the Government of the erstwhile State continue to be in 
force and effective and binding on the successor States 
until and unless they are modified, changed or repudiated 
by the Governments of the successor States. This Court 
observed that no other view is possible to be taken as 
that will merely bring about chaos in the administration 
of the new States. Their Lordships found no principle 
in support of the stand that administrative orders made 
by the Government of the erstwhile State automatically 
lapsed and were rendered ineffective on the coming into 
existence of the new successor States. Their Lordships 
further distinguished a case where there was no change 
of sovereignty and there was merely an adjustment of 
territories by the reorganisation of a particular State, from 
a case of absorption of one State in another by accession, 
conquest, merger or integration. The same view was taken 
by this Court in the other two judgments referred to earlier. 
We are of the view that the principles laid down in Balbir 
Singh case (1976) 3 SCC 242 fully apply to the facts of 
this case having regard to the identical legislative provision 
and, particularly so when the notification in question is by 
definition law and not a mere administrative order.”
(emphasis supplied)

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
765
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
The law, laid down by this Court, as aforestated, would leave no 
room for any doubt that, by no stretch of imagination, the impugned 
judgment can be sustained.
State of Madhya Pradesh and others vs. Lafarge Dealers Assn. 
and others (2019) 7 SCC 584
“27. We have quoted the relevant portions of the 
judgment in Swarn Rekha Cokes and Coals (P) Ltd. 
(2004) 6 SCC 689 and have no difficulty in agreeing 
to the dictum as enunciated in paras 26, 27 and 28, 
but find it difficult to agree with the ratio recorded in 
para 29. The effect of Sections 84 and 85 of the Bihar 
Reorganisation Act, 2000 was to ensure continuity 
of laws enacted by the unified State of Bihar in the 
new State of Jharkhand which had been created by 
transfer of territories which earlier formed part of the 
State of Bihar. These sections incorporating a deeming 
fiction were to ensure that the new State of Jharkhand 
would continue to be governed by the pre-existing 
laws as, otherwise, there would be a disorderly and 
chaotic situation where the new State would not be 
governed by any law. This is the true effect of the legal 
fiction created by Section 84 of the Bihar Reorganisation 
Act, 2000 i.e. the reorganisation of the State would not 
affect the applicability of the existing laws in the State to 
all territories included within it before and even after the 
reorganisation. The said fiction does not postulate and 
cannot be extended to imagine that for the purpose of sale 
transactions or even for other purposes, the new State 
did not have any political and constitutional existence as 
a separate State and that till a new law was enacted, the 
two States were to be treated as one political State as it 
was before the reorganisation. The sale transactions which 
were hitherto intra-State sales being within the unified State 
of Bihar, would become inter-State transactions once the 
two new States had come into existence. The provisions 
do not stipulate that such transactions would continue 
to be treated as intra-State transactions notwithstanding 
creation of the new State.”
(emphasis supplied)

766
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Thus, this Court has, in fact, approved the earlier decision in Swarn 
Rekha Cokes and Coals (P) Ltd. (supra) with respect to the law as 
laid down in paragraphs 26 to 28.
State, Central Bureau of Investigation v. A. Satish Kumar And 
Others AIR 2025 SUPREME COURT 913 
“15. Having gone through the reasons that made the High 
Court to come to such conclusions as mentioned and to 
quash the subject FIRs and the subsequent proceedings 
thereon, we will consider the contentions raised to mount 
attack against the same. As noted hereinbefore, the core 
contention of the appellant is that the High Court had 
failed to consider Circular Memo No. 13665/SR/2014 
dated 26.05.2014 and its true import. Indeed, the said 
circular was issued in terms of Section 3 of the A.P. 
Reorganisation Act. Para 2 of the said circular reads 
thus:-
“2. In this connection, it is stated that “law” as defined 
in section 2(f) of the Act is as follows:-
(f) ‘law’ includes any enactment, ordinance, 
regulation, order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification 
or other instrument having, immediately before 
the appointed day, the force of law in the whole 
or in any part of the existing State of Andhra 
Pradesh”
16. Clauses (i) to (iii) of Paragraph 6 of the said circular 
are also relevant in the circumstances and they read 
thus:
“(i) all the laws, which were applicable to the undivided 
State of Andhra Pradesh, as on 1-6-2014, would 
continue to apply to the new States i.e., State of 
Telangana and State of Andhra Pradesh created Dy the 
Central Act, with effect from 2-6-2014 notwithstanding 
the bifurcation of the erstwhile Pradesh;
(ii) to facilitate their application in respect of the State 
of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh, the 
appropriate Government may, before the expiration 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
767
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
of two years from 2-6-2014, by order, make such 
adaptions and modifications of the law, whether by 
way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or 
expedient, and thereupon,
(iii) every such law as adapted or modified as above, 
will continue till such time it altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent Legislature or other 
competent authority, in the respective State.”
***
21.…In view of the impact of para 2(f) and clauses 
(i) to (ii) under para 6 such notification or circulars 
which were in force prior to the bifurcation or modified 
subsequently, in the absence of repeal or amendment 
as relates the subject matter involved thereunder within 
the limits of State of Telangana should be presumed 
to exist within the limits of State of Telangana and 
therefore, the finding of the High Court all such ‘laws’ 
pertain only to the State of Andhra Pradesh cannot be 
the correct law and the legal fiction should be that such 
laws would be in force in the new State unless altered 
or repealed or amended by it, in accordance with law. 
If in the light of the aforesaid Govt. orders especially 
dated 26.05.2014, the position is not construed in 
the said manner it will create only lawlessness or in 
other words a total vacuum in the subject matter(s) in 
which event persons could engage in such offences 
with impunity to certain extent. There cannot be any 
doubt that virtually it is to avoid such a situation that 
the aforementioned Government orders were issued 
and, therefore, any contra-construction would defeat 
the very soul of the provisions under the PC Act as 
also the very intent and purpose of the Government 
orders which were given the status of ‘law’ by virtue 
of definition under para 2(f) of the Circular Memo 
dated 26.05.2014 issued under Section 3 of the AP 
Reorganisation Act.
22. In the light of the discussion as above and construction 
of the Govt. orders it can only be held that the High Court 

768
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
had erred in holding that there was no notification issued 
conferring the status of Special Court in terms of Section 
4 of the PC Act to the CBI Court, Hyderabad. Now, the 
transfer of the cases concerned subsequent to the CBI 
Policy Division order regarding the re-defining the territorial 
jurisdiction of CBI, Hyderabad and Vishakhapatnam 
branches dated 28.03.2019 and issuance of notification by 
the High Court of Telangana vide ROC No. 334/E-1/2008 
dated 03.09.2019 and the transfer of CC Nos. 35 of 2020 
and 37 of 2020 to the Court of the Special Judge for CBI 
Cases, Kurnool were held as in accordance with law by 
the High Court. In such circumstances and in the light 
of the conclusion already arrived at, the terms of the 
provisions under circular memo dated 26.05.2014 all 
“laws” applicable to the undivided State of Andhra 
Pradesh on 01.06.2014 would continue to apply to the 
new States, namely, the State of Telangana and the 
State of Andhra Pradesh despite the bifurcation of the 
erstwhile State of Andhra Pradesh till such time they 
were altered, repealed or amended.”
(emphasis supplied)
26.	 This Court took the earlier judgments into consideration and, in fact, 
dealt with the very same 2014 Act and held that the legal fiction should 
be so that the existing laws, prior to bifurcation, would continue to be 
in force in both the States, unless altered, repealed or amended in 
accordance with law. Any construction to the contrary would defeat 
the very intent and purpose of the Government Orders, which were 
given the status of ‘law,’ vide Circular dated 26.05.2014. 
27.	 Accordingly, we have no hesitation in setting aside the impugned 
judgment. Consciously, we are not going into the other issues, as, 
primarily, we are dealing with the impugned judgment before us. 
However, we make it clear that the High Court of Andhra Pradesh 
shall entertain no more challenge to the FIRs. 
28.	 We have been informed that in some cases, the charge-sheets 
have already been filed. Hence, we give liberty to the respondents 
herein, to challenge the charge sheets, which have already been 
filed and those which are yet to be filed, on other grounds, if so 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
769
The Joint Director (Rayalaseema), Anti-Corruption Bureau,  
A.P. & Anr. Etc. v. Dayam Peda Ranga Rao Etc.
warranted. Liberty is also given to them to raise all the contentions, 
other than the one being decided by us, only after the conclusion 
of the investigation. 
29.	 We further make it clear that in those cases where the investigation is 
still pending, the appellant(s) shall not take any coercive action, while 
the respondents herein are expected to lend their due cooperation.
CONCLUSION:
1.	
In conclusion, the impugned judgment stands set aside and 
the appeals stand allowed.
2.	
The appellant(s) are at liberty to proceed with the investigation.
3.	
The final reports are to be filed within a period of six months 
from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
4.	
The appellant(s) shall not take any coercive steps by way of 
arresting the respondents herein.
5.	
The respondents herein shall co-operate with the expeditious 
conclusion of the investigation.
6.	
The High Court shall not entertain any more challenge to the 
FIRs or the pending investigation. 
7.	
Liberty is granted to the respondents herein to raise all the 
other issues, other than the one decided by us, only after the 
conclusion of the investigation. 
8.	
The impleading application, being CRL. M.P. No. 245004 of 
2025, is allowed.
9.	
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
