[2026] 7 S.C.R. 220 : 2026 INSC 630
Baksish Ahmad
v.
Union of India & Anr.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 8452-53 of 2026)
09 June 2026
[Dipankar Datta* and 
Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was right in refusing to entertain, try and 
adjudicate the writ petition of the appellant on the ground of forum 
non conveniens.
Headnotes†
Doctrine of forum non conveniens – Constitution of India – 
Art.226 – BSF Act – ss.4, 5 – Border Security Force Rules, 1969 – 
r.22 – Doctrine of forum non conveniens, misapplication in the 
context of writ jurisdiction – When – Appellant-BSF Constable 
had contracted a second marriage without permission of 
the competent authority, during the subsistence of his first 
marriage – Dismissed from service – Appellant filed statutory 
petition u/r.28A of the BSF Rules seeking reinstatement in 
service, rejected by Inspector General, Frontier Headquarters, 
BSF, Jammu – Challenging the orders of dismissal from service 
and rejection of statutory petition, appellant filed writ petition 
before the Delhi High Court – Dismissed on the ground of 
forum non conveniens – Review petition thereagainst also 
dismissed – Challenge to:
Held: The doctrine of forum non conveniens was misapplied by the 
Division Bench in the context of writ jurisdiction referable to Art.226 of 
the Constitution – Such article permits filing of a writ petition as per 
situs of office of the respondent(s) – Where the question of pursuing 
a constitutional remedy is involved and invocation of writ jurisdiction 
is traceable to clause (1) of Article 226, the doctrine of forum non 
conveniens may rarely apply – Further, a 3-Judge Bench decision 
of this Court in Shri Ranjeet Mal laid down the law that the Union of 
India would be fastened with the liability for enforcement of an order 
* Author

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
221
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
quashing an order of dismissal/removal from service of a railway 
servant, and not the officer who passed it – This decision, read with 
ss.4 and 5 of the BSF Act, makes the position clear that the Union 
of India and the Director General, BSF having their offices in New 
Delhi were necessary parties to the appellant’s writ petition and, 
thus, had been duly impleaded as the respondents before the Delhi 
High Court – Also, in terms of sub-rule (4) of Rule 22, BSF Rules, 
every order of dismissal/removal passed under sub-rule (3) thereof 
has to be reported to the Director General – There is a presumption 
that official acts have been regularly performed – Hence, on a 
cumulative assessment of these factors, the Delhi Court did have the 
competence to entertain and try the writ petition of the appellant – 
Moreover, in case any member of the CAPF, and that includes the 
BSF, is aggrieved by any administrative order of termination of his 
service issued by the competent authority, notwithstanding that the 
cause of action arose outside, i.e., the said order was issued from 
a place beyond the territorial limits of the Delhi High Court or that 
the events which triggered such an order occurred outside its limits, 
etc., still the Delhi High Court would have territorial jurisdiction in 
light of situs of office of the Union of India and the Director General, 
BSF/the officer in whom is vested supervision and command of 
the other CAPF, as per clause (1) of Art.226 – Impugned order set 
aside – Appellant’s writ petition revived – Central Civil Services 
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 – Uttar Pradesh Marriage Registration Rules, 
2017 – Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 – Armed Forces Tribunal 
Rules, 2008. [Paras 21, 27, 37, 38, 40]
Doctrine of forum non conveniens – Applicability:
Held: Doctrine of forum non conveniens applies only where multiple 
fora are available to a litigant for seeking the same remedy; and, 
when such multiple fora are available, the forum which has been 
approached is entitled in law to examine whether any other forum 
is more convenient and/or better suited to consider and decide the 
claim that has been raised by the aggrieved litigant – For informed 
reasons, the forum seized of the claim may refuse to entertain 
the claim and leave the said litigant free to approach the other 
forum – The core idea of forum non conveniens is that although 
the court which has been approached by the suitor can legally 
entertain and try his case, the said court may refuse to do so and 
require the suitor to approach an appropriate court exercising similar 

222
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
jurisdiction and having powers to grant similar relief that is more 
convenient to the parties – Ordinarily, it would be the respondent 
who is likely to raise an objection – By invoking the doctrine of 
forum non conveniens, the respondent while conceding jurisdiction 
would urge the court to decline its exercise – In a courteous tone, 
the argument would be: though the court can entertain and try the 
lis but it may not. [Paras 29, 36]
Constitution of India – Art.226 – BSF Act – Border Security 
Force Rules, 1969 – Available fora exercising writ jurisdiction 
u/Art.226, which the appellant could have approached for relief 
in light of clause (2) thereof:
Held: First and foremost, the High Court at Calcutta since the show 
cause notice and the order terminating the appellant’s service were 
issued from Narayanpur, District Malda, West Bengal; secondly, 
the High Court for the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir and 
Ladakh, since it is within the said high court’s jurisdiction that the 
appellant’s petition u/r.28A, BSF Rules came to be rejected; and 
thirdly, the Allahabad High Court’s writ jurisdiction could have 
also been invoked by the appellant since he married the lady 
in Kushinagar, District Kushinagar, Uttar Pradesh, without prior 
permission of the competent authority and despite subsistence 
of his first marriage, which formed the basic ingredient of the 
charge of misconduct – All these high courts are empowered to 
grant adequate relief, if at all satisfied that a strong case on merits 
has been set up – Notwithstanding that the appellant could have 
approached any of the three high courts based on accrual of part 
cause of action, the Delhi High Court is indeed the fourth forum 
which had the competence to entertain and try the writ petition of 
the appellant – The Division Bench was also conscious and hence 
it did not dismiss the appellant’s writ petition on the ground of 
lack of territorial jurisdiction; it applied the doctrine of “forum non 
conveniens” and held that the Delhi High Court was not “forum 
conveniens” for either party having regard to the run of events 
leading to dismissal of the appellant’s petition u/r.28A of the BSF 
Rules – The refusal to exercise discretion was not legal and 
proper having regard to the claim presented before the Division 
Bench – The doctrine of forum non conveniens was misapplied 
by the Division Bench in the context of writ jurisdiction referable 
to Art.226 of the Constitution – Such article permits filing of a writ 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
223
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
petition as per situs of office of the respondent(s) [clause (1)] and 
cause of action [clause (2)] which gives the right of action – Where 
the question of pursuing a constitutional remedy is involved and 
invocation of writ jurisdiction is traceable to clause (1) of Art.226, 
the doctrine of forum non conveniens may rarely apply – When a 
writ of or in the nature of Certiorari is prayed, Rule Nisi requires 
the records of the case to be placed before the Court for examining 
whether the order under challenge, which is part of the records, 
deserves to be quashed or not by a writ of or in the nature of 
Certiorari – Such records would invariably be available in the 
offices of the respondents; if not, it can readily be called for from 
the custodian thereof – A suitor having himself chosen the forum 
convenient to the respondents, application of the doctrine of forum 
non conveniens could be self-defeating and likely to deny access 
to justice rather than advancing it. [Paras 33, 34, 37]
Case Law Cited
Abrar Ali v. CISF, Civil Appeal No. 6020 of 2012; Shri Ranjeet 
Mal v. General Manager, Northern Railway, Baroda House, New 
Delhi [1977] 2 SCR 409 : (1977) 1 SCC 484; Eastern Coalfields 
Ltd. v. Kalyan Banerjee [2008] 3 SCR 920 : (2008) 3 SCC 456; 
Dinesh Chandra Gahtori v. Chief of Army Staff (2001) 9 SCC 525; 
Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. v. Union of India [2004] 1 Supp. SCR 
841 : ( 2004 ) 6 SCC 254 – referred to.
Sumit Kumar v. Union of India & Ors., W.P. (C) No. 96 of 2017; 
Sunil Kumar v. The Director General, SSB & Ors., W.P. (C) No. 
3983 of 2022; Chhattar Singh v. Union of India & Anr., W.P. (C) 
No. 8626 of 2022 – referred to.
List of Acts
BSF Act; Border Security Force Rules, 1969; Central Civil Services 
(Conduct) Rules, 1964; Uttar Pradesh Marriage Registration Rules, 
2017; Constitution of India; Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007; Armed 
Forces Tribunal Rules, 2008.
List of Keywords
Doctrine of forum non conveniens; Misapplication of Doctrine of 
forum non conveniens in the context of writ jurisdiction; Territorial 
jurisdiction of Delhi High Court; Territorial jurisdiction; Members of 

224
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the Central Armed Police Forces; Member of CAPF; Member of 
BSF; Administrative order of termination of service; Cause of action 
arose outside; Place beyond territorial limits of Delhi High Court; 
Order of dismissal; Delhi High Court has territorial jurisdiction in 
light of situs of office of the Union of India and the Director General, 
BSF/the officer; Director General, BSF having offices in New Delhi 
necessary parties to writ petition; Director General, BSF; Aggrieved 
member of the armed forces; Delhi Court was competent to entertain 
and try the writ petition; Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 8452-53 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.01.2025, 29.08.2025 of 
the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in WP (C) No. 229 of 2025 
and RP No. 38 of 2025, respectively
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Naresh Kumar, M. A. Inayati, Furkan Ali Mirza.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, A.S.G., Anukalp Jain, Rajan Kr.chourasia, 
Vvv Pattabhi Ram, Padmesh Mishra, Udai Khanna, Adarsh Kumar 
Pandey, Arvind Kumar Sharma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Dipankar Datta, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
The Challenge
2.	
Appellant is aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 10th January, 
20251 of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi2 dismissing his writ 
1	
impugned order
2	
Delhi High Court

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
225
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
petition3 as well as the order dated 29th August, 2025 of dismissal 
of his review petition4.
Factual Matrix
3.	
The facts, relevant for deciding this appeal, are as under: 
a)	
Appellant was enrolled as a member of the Border Security 
Force5 on 31st December, 2010. At the relevant time, he was 
posted in the 44th Battalion6. While serving at Narayanpur, 
Malda, in West Bengal, a missing person report concerning one 
xxx7 was received by the Company Commander of 44 Bn on 
24th April, 2022. Appellant and another constable of the 44 Bn 
were suspected to be involved in abduction of the lady. In the 
meanwhile, the appellant’s wife also lodged a complaint. It was 
alleged that the appellant, against her wishes, had contracted 
a second marriage with the lady. It was also alleged that the 
appellant subjected her to criminal force. 
b)	
The Sector Headquarters, BSF, Malda, ordered a Staff Court of 
Inquiry8 to investigate the allegations. During the inquiry, it was 
found that the appellant had contracted a second marriage with 
the lady, who herself was married, during the subsistence of his 
first marriage on 6th May, 2022. The marriage was also formally 
registered under the Uttar Pradesh Marriage Registration 
Rules, 2017 on 23rd May, 2022 at the office of the Marriage 
Registration Officer in Kushinagar, District Kushinagar, Uttar 
Pradesh, without obtaining the necessary permission of the 
competent authority as well as without obtaining divorce from 
his first wife. The SCoI confirmed that the appellant had married 
a second time despite subsistence of his first marriage, without 
permission; however, exonerated him of the allegations relating 
to the lady’s abduction. 
3	
W.P. (C) No.229 of 2025
4	
RP No.38 of 2025
5	
BSF 
6	
44 Bn
7	
lady
8	
SCoI

226
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
c)	
On 19th September, 2022, the appellant was served with a show 
cause notice9 under Rules 2210 and 17711 of the Border Security 
Force Rules, 196912, alleging violation of Rule 713 of the BSF 
Rules and Rule 2114 of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) 
Rules, 196415, on the ground that he had entered into a second 
9	
SCN
10	
Dismissal or removal of persons other than officer on account of misconduct.- (1) When it is proposed to 
terminate the service of a person subject to the Act other than an officer, he shall be given an opportunity 
by the authority competent to dismiss or remove him, to show cause in the manner specified in sub-
rule (2) against such action:
Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply –
(a) where the service is terminated on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction by a 
criminal Court or a Security Force Court; or
(b) where the competent authority is satisfied that, for reasons to be recorded in writing, it is 
not expedient or reasonably practicable to give the person concerned an opportunity of showing 
cause.
(2) When after considering the reports on the misconduct of the person concerned, the competent 
authority is satisfied that the trial of such a person is inexpedient or impracticable, but, is of the opinion 
that his further retention in the service is undesirable, it shall so inform him together with all reports 
adverse to him and he shall be called upon to submit, in writing, his explanation and defence: 
Provided that the competent authority may withhold from disclosure any such report or portion thereof, 
if, in his opinion, its disclosure is not in the public interest.
(3) The competent authority after considering his explanation and defence if any may dismiss or remove 
him from service with or without pension:
Provided that a Deputy Inspector-General shall not dismiss or remove from service, a Subordinate officer 
of and above the rank of an Inspector.
(4) All cases of dismissal or removal under this rule, shall be reported to the Director-General.
11	
Prescribed Officer under Section 11(2).- The Commandant may, under sub-section (2) or section 11, 
dismiss or remove from the service any person under his command other than an officer or a subordinate 
officer.
12	
BSF Rules
13	
Disqualification.- (1) No person -
(a) who has entered into or contracted a marriage with a person having a spouse living, or
(b) who having a spouse living, has entered into or contracted a marriage with any person, shall be 
eligible for appointment into Force:
Provided that the Central Government may if satisfied that such marriage is permissible under the 
personal law applicable to such person and the other party to the marriage and that there are other 
grounds for so doing, exempt any person from the operation of this rule.
14	
21. Restriction regarding marriage.- (1) No Government servant shall enter into, or contract, a marriage 
with a person having a spouse living; and 
(2) No Government servant, having a spouse living, shall enter into, or contract, a marriage with any 
person: 
Provided that the Central Government may permit a Government servant to enter into, or contract, any 
such marriage as is referred to in clause (1) or clause (2), if it is satisfied that- 
(a) such marriage is permissible under the personal law applicable to such Government servant 
and the other party to the marriage; and 
(b) there are other grounds for so doing. 
(3) A Government servant who has married or marries a person other than of Indian Nationality shall 
forthwith intimate the fact to the Government.
15	
CCS Rules

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
227
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
marriage during the subsistence of both his own marriage and 
that of the lady, without permission. The SCN was served on 
him at Narayanpur, District Malda, West Bengal.
d)	
Appellant failed to submit a reply to the SCN within the stipulated 
period of fifteen days from its receipt. Consequently, by an 
order dated 27th October, 2022, the Commandant, 44 Bn, in 
exercise of powers conferred on him by Rules 22 and 177 of 
the BSF Rules, dismissed the appellant from service without 
any pensionary benefits. Appellant was, accordingly, struck-off 
strength of the BSF from the said date. This order was also 
served on the appellant at Narayanpur, District Malda, West 
Bengal.
e)	
Aggrieved by the order of dismissal, the appellant preferred a 
statutory petition under Rule 28A16 of the BSF Rules seeking 
reinstatement in service. Such petition was addressed to the 
Director General, BSF. Since the appellant was an enrolled 
member of the BSF, such petition should have been addressed 
to the Inspector General in terms of Rule 28A. The petition 
was, accordingly, placed before the Inspector General, Frontier 
Headquarters, BSF, Jammu who, by his order dated 22nd 
December, 2023 condoned the delay in filing the petition but 
proceeded to reject the same on merits.
f)	
Challenging the orders of dismissal from service and rejection 
of his statutory petition, the appellant unsuccessfully invoked 
the writ jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court by filing the petition 
under Article 226 of the Constitution. 
Impugned Order
4.	
Appellant’s contention before the Delhi High Court was that such 
court did have the territorial jurisdiction because the offices of the 
16	
Petition.- Any person subject to the Act, who considers himself aggrieved by any order of termination 
of his service passed under this Chapter may; in the case of an officer, present a petition to the Central 
Government, in the case of an Assistant Sub-Inspector or a subordinate officer, present a petition to the 
Director-General and in the case of an enrolled person, present a petition to the Inspector-General, who 
may pass such orders on the petition as deemed fit:
Provided that the limitation period for filing such petition shall be three months from the date of order of 
termination or from the date of its receipt, whichever is later.

228
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Director General, BSF and the Ministry of Home Affairs17 were 
located in Delhi.
5.	
The impugned order passed by the Division Bench of the Delhi 
High Court is a short order spread over 8 paragraphs. We consider 
it appropriate to quote the entire order, hereunder:
1. This petition has been filed by the petitioner praying for 
the following relief:-
“(1) Issue a Writ/Order/Direction setting aside 
the dismissal order dated 27.10.2022 passed by 
the Commandant, and reinstate the petitioner 
in his post with all consequential benefits and 
back wages.”
2. The petitioner was dismissed from service vide 
the Impugned Order dated 27.10.2022 issued by the 
Commandant, 44 Bn. BSF, Narayanpur, District Malda, 
West Bengal. Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner 
submitted a Statutory Petition dated 18.09.2023, under 
Rule 28A of the BSF Rules, 1969, which was dismissed 
by the Inspector General, Frontier Headquarters, BSF, 
Jammu & Kashmir, vide Order dated 22.12.2023.
3. The petitioner himself is a resident of the State of Uttar 
Pradesh.
4. We, therefore, enquired from the petitioner as to why 
this petition has been filed before this Court. He submits 
that the petition has been filed before this Court as the 
office of the Director General, BSF and the Ministry of 
Home Affairs is situated at Delhi.
5. We do not find merit in the above submission. Merely 
because the offices of the respondents are situated in 
Delhi, would not make this court the forum conveniens, 
especially where no part of the cause of action has arisen 
within its jurisdiction.
17	
Respondents

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
229
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
6. In the present case, the petitioner was dismissed from 
service vide Impugned Order dated 27.10.2023, which 
was issued at West Bengal. The petitioner subsequently 
submitted a statutory petition dated 18.09.2023, which 
has been dismissed by the Inspector General, Frontier 
Headquarters, BSF Jammu & Kashmir, vide Order dated 
22.12.2023. Therefore, the cause of action for filing of the 
petition has arisen at West Bengal or in the Union Territory 
of Jammu and Kashmir. Merely because the office of the 
Director General, BSF and the Ministry of Home Affairs 
is situated at Delhi, it will not make this Court a forum 
conveniens. 
7. Applying the principle of the doctrine of forum non 
conveniens, therefore, we are of the opinion that this 
Court would not be the appropriate/convenient Forum for 
entertaining the present petition. Accordingly, we decline to 
entertain the present petition in exercise of the discretion 
vested in us under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
8. The petition and the pending application are dismissed, 
while reserving the liberty of the petitioner to avail of his 
remedies in accordance with law before the Court having 
jurisdiction.
Contentions of the Parties
6.	
Mr. Inayati, learned counsel for the appellant, vehemently contended 
that the Delhi High Court did have the territorial jurisdiction to 
entertain the writ petition. In support of this submission, reliance was 
first placed upon Article 226 of the Constitution. It was argued that 
clause (1) of Article 226 confers jurisdiction upon a high court where 
the person or authority against whom a writ, direction, or order is 
sought is situated within its territorial limits, whereas clause (2) of the 
said article enables a high court to exercise jurisdiction where the 
cause of action arises, wholly or in part, within its territory. According 
to him, the Central Government exercises overall superintendence 
over the BSF, while its command and administration vest in the 
Director General, BSF, and the offices of both the authorities are 
located in Delhi. Consequently, the Delhi High Court was competent 
to adjudicate the lis under clause (1) of Article 226. 

230
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
7.	
Mr. Inayati placed heavy reliance on the decision of this Court in 
Abrar Ali v. CISF18. He contended that the issue involved therein 
was substantially similar and the decision being pat on the point, 
the ratio thereof squarely applies in this case. He urged that the 
appellant was entitled to similar relief in the present case.
8.	
Drawing our attention to several other Division Bench decisions19 of 
the Delhi High Court, Mr. Inayati further contended that the decision 
in Abrar Ali (supra) has been consistently followed and there was 
no justification for the Division Bench hearing the appellant’s writ 
petition to take a contrary view. 
9.	
Lastly, Mr. Inayati submitted that the Delhi High Court was also 
the appropriate forum conveniens for both the appellant and 
the respondents, particularly in view of the proximity of the BSF 
Headquarters to such court.
10.	 Accordingly, Mr. Inayati prayed that the Delhi High Court be directed 
to hear and decide the appellant’s writ petition on merits upon setting 
aside of the impugned order. 
11.	 Per contra, Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General 
appearing for the respondents, submitted that the impugned judgment 
warrants no interference. She contended that the Delhi High Court 
had correctly held that no part of the cause of action arose within its 
territorial jurisdiction, - the relevant events having occurred either in 
West Bengal (where the appellant was dismissed from service) or 
in the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir (where his statutory 
petition came to be rejected). It was further argued that the Delhi 
High Court could not be regarded as the forum conveniens merely 
because the situs of the offices of the respondents were in Delhi. 
On the contrary, the most appropriate forum is the High Court at 
Calcutta within whose territorial jurisdiction the integral and essential 
part of the cause of action had arisen. 
12.	 Reference was made by Ms. Bhati to the decision of this Court in 
Arif Azim Co. Ltd. v. Micromax Informatics FZE where the concept 
of forum non conveniens has been dealt with by a 3-Judge Bench. 
18	
Civil Appeal No. 6020 of 2012
19	
W.P. (C) No.96 of 2017 (Sumit Kumar v. Union of India & ors.), W.P. (C) No.3983 of 2022 (Sunil Kumar v. 
The Director General, SSB & ors.) and W.P. (C) No.8626 of 2022 (Chhattar Singh v. Union of India & anr.) 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
231
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
Relying on paragraphs 71, 72 and 75 of the said decision, it was 
contended that the Division bench of the Delhi Court did not commit 
any irregularity, far less illegality, in relegating the appellant to either 
of the two high courts where part cause of action arose.
13.	 Ms. Bhati, accordingly, prayed that the appeal deserves to be dismissed.
Analysis
14.	 We have heard the parties at length and examined the precedents 
cited by them.
15.	 Although the facts and the question of law are not too complicated, 
this is a case which calls for circumspection since it could affect 
not only enrolled members of the BSF like the appellant but other 
members of the Central Armed Police Forces20 too. 
16.	 The limited question before us is whether the Delhi High Court was 
right in refusing to entertain, try and adjudicate the writ petition of 
the appellant on the ground of forum non conveniens. 
17.	 In Abrar Ali (supra), this Court held:
“We have heard Dr. L.S. Chaudhary, learned counsel for 
the petitioner, and Mr. Sidharth Luthra, learned Additional 
Solicitor General for the respondents.
2. Leave granted.
3. The Writ Petition filed by the appellant has been 
dismissed by the Delhi High Court vide order dated May 
3, 2011 by holding that no cause of action has accrued 
within the territorial jurisdiction of that Court. From the 
impugned order, it appears that the High Court considered 
the aspect of jurisdiction with reference to Article 226(2) 
of the Constitution of India. We are afraid, the impugned 
order cannot be sustained as the High Court overlooked 
Article 226(1) of the Constitution of India. The appellant 
approached Delhi High Court as the headquarter of 
respondent No.1 – Central Industrial Security Force - is 
located in Delhi. The jurisdiction of the Delhi High Court 
in the matter is, thus, clearly referable to Article 226(1).
20	
CAPF

232
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
4. We, accordingly, allow the Appeal and set aside the 
impugned order and restore Writ Petition being Writ Petition 
(Civil) No. 1241 of 2011 titled “Abrar Ali vs. C.I.S.F. & Ors.” 
to the Delhi High Court for consideration in accordance of 
law. No orders as to costs.” 
(emphasis ours)
18.	 Bare perusal of paragraph 3 reveals that the coordinate Bench 
proceeded to hold the order under challenge unsustainable on the 
premise that the Delhi High Court overlooked clause (1) of Article 226. 
19.	 The order under challenge in Abrar Ali (supra), however, throws light 
on what was considered by the Delhi High Court. It reads as follows:
1. At the outset, learned counsel for the respondents raises 
the bar of territorial jurisdiction.
2. It is not in dispute that the order dated 28.11.2000 has 
been passed by the Disciplinary Authority at Dhanbad 
and was conveyed to the petitioner at Dhanbad. It is also 
not in dispute that Appellate order dated 01.02.2001 has 
been passed at Dhanbad and conveyed to the petitioner 
at his village in District Muzaffarnagar, U.P. It is also not 
in dispute that the Revisional order dated 31.12.2010 has 
been passed by the Revisional Authority i.e. Inspector 
General, CISF at Patna and has been conveyed to the 
petitioner at his village in District Muzaffarnagar, U.P.
3. It is apparent that no cause of action has accrued within 
the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
4. Merely because the seat of the Union of India or that 
the Director General, CISF is stationed at Delhi would thus 
be irrelevant in view of law laid down by a Co-ordinate 
Division Bench of this Court in the decision reported in 
Vinod Kumar vs. Union of India 2007(1) AD (Delhi) 284.
5. Accordingly, we dismiss the writ petition granting liberty 
to the petitioner to approach the Court of competent 
jurisdiction.
6. No costs.”
(underlining in original)

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
233
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
20.	 With due respect to the coordinate Bench which decided Abrar 
Ali (supra), the observation that the Delhi High Court overlooked 
clause  (1) of Article 226 does not appear to be wholly correct. 
Paragraph 4 of the order of the Delhi High Court, for whatever it is 
worth, provides sufficient indication of consideration of clause (1) of 
Article 226 in the light of an earlier decision of the same court. This 
part of the order under challenge seems to have been overlooked 
by this Court. 
21.	 In any event, despite such oversight, we agree with the decision in 
Abrar Ali (supra). The reason lies here. A 3-Judge Bench decision 
of this Court in Shri Ranjeet Mal v. General Manager, Northern 
Railway, Baroda House, New Delhi21 laid down the law that the 
Union of India would be fastened with the liability for enforcement 
of an order quashing an order of dismissal/removal from service of 
a railway servant, and not the officer who passed it. This decision, 
read with the provisions of Sections 4 and 5 of the BSF Act, makes 
the position clear that the Union of India and the Director General, 
BSF having their offices in New Delhi were necessary parties to the 
appellant’s writ petition and, thus, had been duly impleaded as the 
respondents before the Delhi High Court. Also, we bear in mind that in 
terms of sub-rule (4) of Rule 22, BSF Rules, every order of dismissal/
removal passed under sub-rule (3) thereof has to be reported to 
the Director General. There is a presumption that official acts have 
been regularly performed. Hence, on a cumulative assessment of 
these factors, there may not be any difficulty in holding that the Delhi 
Court did have the competence to entertain and try the writ petition 
of the appellant. 
22.	 Significantly, the impugned order of the Division Bench does not 
say that the Delhi High Court has no jurisdiction. We presume, the 
Division Bench was aware of the decision in Abrar Ali (supra), though 
not formally noticed, as well as the other Division Bench decisions 
of the Delhi High Court which followed Abrar Ali (supra).
23.	 However, we find a somewhat discordant note having been struck in an 
earlier decision of another coordinate Bench of this Court in Eastern 
Coalfields Ltd. v. Kalyan Banerjee22 which Abrar Ali (supra) did not 
21	
(1977) 1 SCC 484
22	
(2008) 3 SCC 456

234
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
notice. In Kalyan Banerjee (supra), this Court dealt with a somewhat 
similar situation. Although the entire cause of action for exercising the 
right of action arose in Jharkhand, the order of penalty was challenged 
by the employee before the High Court at Calcutta since the head 
office of the employer was located in Sanctoria, Burdwan, within the 
territory of West Bengal. This is what the Court held: 
13. In view of the decision of the Division Bench of the 
Calcutta High Court that the entire cause of action arose in 
Mugma area within the State of Jharkhand, we are of the 
opinion that only because the head office of the appellant 
Company was situated in the State of West Bengal, the 
same by itself will not confer any jurisdiction upon the 
Calcutta High Court, particularly when the head office 
had nothing to do with the order of punishment passed 
against the respondent.
24.	 A critical view of Abrar Ali (supra) could lead to the conclusion that 
the decision in Kalyan Banerjee (supra) and a host of other decisions 
on the point of territorial jurisdiction referred to therein not having 
been considered, it has its own consequences. Prudence dictates 
silence on this aspect. 
25.	 We are, however, conscious that in Kalyan Banerjee (supra), this 
Court did not notice its earlier 3-Judge Bench decision in Dinesh 
Chandra Gahtori v. Chief of Army Staff23. In the context of a 
writ petition which was dismissed 7 (seven) years after it was filed 
on the ground of cause of action having entirely arisen within the 
State of Punjab including the order of penalty issued by the West 
(sic, Western) Command and, therefore, the court lacked territorial 
jurisdiction, this Court ruled that the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad24 should have taken into consideration that the Chief of 
Army Staff can be sued anywhere in the country. 
26.	 The decision in Dinesh Chandra Gahtori (supra) is notably silent both 
on the factual matrix pleaded and the role, if any, of the Chief of Army 
Staff in imposition of the order of penalty. Hence, the circumstances 
leading to the conclusion that the Chief of Army Staff is amenable to 
23	
(2001) 9 SCC 525
24	
Allahabad High Court

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
235
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
be sued across the country are difficult to discern. In any event, the 
decision in Dinesh Chandra Gahtori (supra) is prior to the introduction 
of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 200725 which, through Rule 626 of the 
Armed Forces Tribunal Rules, 2008, has regulated the place of filing 
application and designated the forum, i.e., the relevant Bench of the 
Tribunal which ordinarily would proceed to hear the application. Once 
such Bench of the Tribunal can be approached by an aggrieved member 
of the armed forces for remedy, to hold that Dinesh Chandra Gahtori 
(supra) still permits the Chief of Army Staff to be sued anywhere in the 
country would re-introduce the multiplicity of forum that the AFT Act 
sought to eliminate and, thereby, defeat its object. The said decision, 
therefore, cannot be of any relevance post the AFT Act.
27.	 Be that as it may, to reconcile the conflict, if any, we hold that in case 
any member of the CAPF, and that includes the BSF, is aggrieved 
by any administrative order of termination of his service issued by 
the competent authority, notwithstanding that the cause of action 
arose outside, i.e., the said order was issued from a place beyond 
the territorial limits of the Delhi High Court or that the events which 
triggered such an order occurred outside its limits, etc., still the Delhi 
High Court would have territorial jurisdiction in light of situs of office 
of the Union of India and the Director General, BSF/the officer in 
whom is vested supervision and command of the other CAPF, as 
per clause (1) of Article 226. 
28.	 Moving on to the decision in Arif Azim (supra), Ms. Bhati has relied 
on certain paragraphs which need to be noted now. The same read 
as under:
71. … The term “forum non conveniens” is a Latin term 
which means “an inconvenient forum” and provides that a 
25	
AFT Act
26	
Place of filing application. – (1) An application shall ordinarily be filed by the applicant with the Registrar 
of the Bench within whose jurisdiction -
(i) the applicant is posted for the time being, or was last posted or attached; or
(ii) where the cause of action, wholly or in part, has arisen:
Provided that with the leave of the Chairperson the application may be filed with the Registrar of the 
Principal Bench and subject to the orders under section 14 or section 15 of the Act, such application shall 
be heard and disposed of by the Bench which has jurisdiction over the matter.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), a person who has ceased to be in service by 
reason of his retirement, dismissal, discharge, cashiering, release, removal, resignation or termination 
of service may, at his option, file an application with the Registrar of the Bench within whose jurisdiction 
such person is ordinarily residing at the time of filing of the application.

236
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
court which otherwise might have jurisdiction may decline 
jurisdiction over a case if there is a more appropriate 
forum available to the parties, and is typically invoked in 
respect of cross-border subject-matters that are amenable 
to multiple concurrent jurisdictions. Depending upon the 
nature of the dispute, the subject-matter involved and 
the parties thereto, the courts by invoking this doctrine 
proceed to determine which one of the available forums 
may be more convenient and fair for entertaining and 
adjudicating the matter.
72. In order to apply the doctrine of forum non conveniens 
an adequate alternative forum must exist where the 
subject-matter may be espoused. The alternative forum 
must be capable of providing a fair and adequate remedy 
for the dispute, however this does not mean that the 
alternative forum must offer identical remedies, and this 
doctrine may be applied as long as the other alternative 
forum offers a reasonably fair process of remedy and is 
more convenient or appropriate in the opinion of the court 
invoking the doctrine. Courts in doing so must weigh the 
relative importance of private and public interest factors. 
In doing so, they exercise a high level of discretion and 
often issue rulings that are fact specific.
***
75. What can be discerned from the above is that where 
more than one forum is available, it is the discretion of the 
court to entertain the matter by examining as to which is 
the appropriate forum more suited for the interests of all 
the parties and the ends of justice. Ordinarily, the burden 
to prove that the court or forum in seisin of the matter 
is an inconvenient forum or the proceedings therein are 
oppressive or vexatious lies on the party contending the 
same, yet the choice of forum by the other party is not 
decisive, and that it is for the court to determine whether 
the proceedings before it might be an inconvenience to 
the interests of the parties or less appropriate for the 
subject-matter in question.
29.	 What follows from the above passages is that the doctrine of forum 
non conveniens applies only where multiple fora are available to a 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
237
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
litigant for seeking the same remedy; and, when such multiple fora 
are available, the forum which has been approached is entitled in 
law to examine whether any other forum is more convenient and/or 
better suited to consider and decide the claim that has been raised 
by the aggrieved litigant. For informed reasons, the forum seized 
of the claim may refuse to entertain the claim and leave the said 
litigant free to approach the other forum. It is, however, noticed that 
the decision in Arif Azim (supra) did not arise from writ proceedings. 
30.	 We may, in this connection, also profitably refer to the 3-Judge Bench 
decision in Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. v. Union of India27. The 
proposition of law, which is of importance for deciding this appeal, 
reads as under: 
30. … even if a small part of cause of action arises within 
the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court, the same by 
itself may not be considered to be a determinative factor 
compelling the High Court to decide the matter on merit. 
In appropriate cases, the Court may refuse to exercise 
its discretionary jurisdiction by invoking the doctrine of 
forum conveniens.
(emphasis ours)
31.	 Therefore, in Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. (supra), an observation 
as to the applicability of the doctrine of forum non conveniens was 
made where causes of action arise within the jurisdiction of more 
than one high court, and not in relation to the situs of office of the 
respondent(s). 
32.	 What then are the available fora exercising writ jurisdiction under 
Article 226, which the appellant could have approached for relief in 
light of clause (2) thereof?
33.	 First and foremost, the High Court at Calcutta since the SCN and 
the order terminating the appellant’s service were issued from 
Narayanpur, District Malda, West Bengal; secondly, the High Court 
for the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, since it is 
within the said high court’s jurisdiction that the appellant’s petition 
under Rule 28A, BSF Rules came to be rejected; and thirdly, 
27	
(2004) 6 SCC 254

238
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the Allahabad High Court’s writ jurisdiction could have also been 
invoked by the appellant since he married the lady in Kushinagar, 
District Kushinagar, Uttar Pradesh, without prior permission of the 
competent authority and despite subsistence of his first marriage, 
which formed the basic ingredient of the charge of misconduct. All 
these high courts are empowered to grant adequate relief, if at all 
satisfied that a strong case on merits has been set up.
34.	 Notwithstanding that the appellant could have approached any of 
the three high courts based on accrual of part cause of action, as 
observed earlier, the Delhi High Court is indeed the fourth forum 
which had the competence to entertain and try the writ petition of 
the appellant. The Division Bench was also conscious and hence it 
did not dismiss the appellant’s writ petition on the ground of lack of 
territorial jurisdiction; it applied the doctrine of “forum non conveniens” 
and held that the Delhi High Court was not “forum conveniens” for 
either party having regard to the run of events leading to dismissal 
of the appellant’s petition under Rule 28A of the BSF Rules.
35.	 It is in the conspectus of the above fact situation that we need to 
examine whether the approach of the Division Bench of the Delhi 
High Court to apply the doctrine of forum non conveniens to non-
suit the appellant was justified and acceptable. It is obvious from a 
reading of the impugned order that discretion was not exercised in 
favour of the appellant because it was felt that the other high courts 
provided a more convenient forum for the appellant to approach. 
However, for the reason that follows, we do not find the refusal to 
exercise discretion to be legal and proper having regard to the claim 
presented before the Division Bench. 
36.	 The core idea of forum non conveniens is that although the court 
which has been approached by the suitor can legally entertain and 
try his case, the said court may refuse to do so and require the suitor 
to approach an appropriate court exercising similar jurisdiction and 
having powers to grant similar relief that is more convenient to the 
parties. Ordinarily, it would be the respondent who is likely to raise 
an objection. By invoking the doctrine of forum non conveniens, 
the respondent while conceding jurisdiction would urge the court to 
decline its exercise. In a courteous tone, the argument would be : 
though the court can entertain and try the lis but it may not. 
37.	 In our considered opinion, the doctrine of forum non conveniens 
has been misapplied by the Division Bench in the context of writ 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
239
Baksish Ahmad v. Union of India & Anr.
jurisdiction referable to Article 226 of the Constitution. Such article 
permits filing of a writ petition as per situs of office of the respondent(s) 
[clause (1)] and cause of action [clause (2)] which gives the right of 
action. Where the question of pursuing a constitutional remedy is 
involved and invocation of writ jurisdiction is traceable to clause (1) 
of Article 226, the doctrine of forum non conveniens may rarely 
apply. When a writ of or in the nature of Certiorari is prayed, Rule 
Nisi requires the records of the case to be placed before the Court 
for examining whether the order under challenge, which is part of 
the records, deserves to be quashed or not by a writ of or in the 
nature of Certiorari. Such records would invariably be available in 
the offices of the respondents28; if not, it can readily be called for 
from the custodian thereof. A suitor having himself chosen the forum 
convenient to the respondents, application of the doctrine of forum 
non conveniens could be self-defeating and likely to deny access 
to justice rather than advancing it. 
38.	 For the foregoing reason, the impugned order merits interference; the 
same is set aside. The appeal thereagainst succeeds and is allowed. 
39.	 Since no appeal lies against dismissal of a review petition, the appeal 
against the order of dismissal of the review petition is dismissed as 
not maintainable. 
40.	 This order results in revival of the appellant’s writ petition on the 
file of the Delhi High Court. The same may now be considered and 
decided on its own merits and according to law. For facilitating early 
disposal thereof, we grant the respondents in the writ petition two 
months’ time to file their counter affidavit; rejoinder thereto, if any, 
may be filed by the appellant by a month thereafter. 
41.	 Connected applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
28	
see, for this case, sub-rule (4) of Rule 22, BSF Rules
