[2026] 7 S.C.R. 187 : 2026 INSC 648
Rajat Kumar and Others
v.
S D Adarsh Jain Kanya Maha 
Vidyalaya Sadhaura and Others
(Civil Appeal No(s). 19552-19553 of 2017)
19 June 2026
[S.V.N. Bhatti and Atul S. Chandurkar,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court erred in reversing the decree for mandatory 
injunction for removal of encroachment in favour of the plaintiff 
passed by the Trial Court and upheld by the first Appellate Court 
and, undertaking an exercise to compensate the legal heirs of 
the plaintiff in monetary terms without any prayer being made in 
that regard.
Headnotes†
Relief – Not prayed for – Grant of – Impermissibility – Original 
plaintiff filed suits against the respondents-original defendants 
seeking mandatory injunction for removal of alleged illegal 
encroaching wall; removal of lintel of the school building 
erected by defendants on the wall of the plaintiff’s house – 
Suits decreed by Trial Court, defendants were directed to 
remove the constructions and also restrained from raising 
any further construction – Decrees affirmed by First Appellate 
Court – High Court, in second appeals modified the decrees, 
directed the defendants to pay compensation and to treat the 
wall as ‘common’ between the parties – In previous round of 
litigation, High Court’s judgment was set aside by Supreme 
Court on the ground that the modification of the decrees 
by the High Court without entering into the merits of the 
controversy was impermissible and no substantial questions 
of law were framed while deciding the Second Appeals; matter 
remanded for fresh consideration – On remand, the High Court 
yet again set aside the decrees and directed the Executing 
Court to assess the value of the construction for payment of 
compensation to the legal heirs of the plaintiff; the defendants 
* Author

188
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
were directed to deposit such amount in the Executing Court 
to be paid to the legal heirs of the plaintiff – Challenge to:
Held: High Court erred in reversing the decrees passed by the 
Trial Court and affirmed by the first Appellate Court on irrelevant 
considerations – The initial suit filed by the original plaintiff 
was essentially for a decree for mandatory injunction seeking 
removal of the alleged encroachment undertaken at the behest 
of the defendants on the common open space beyond the 
construction of the plaintiff – According to the original plaintiff, 
such construction interfered with the right of the plaintiff to enjoy 
air and light through the ventilators as well as obstructed the 
passing of water through the common path – Defendants could 
not prove any right, title or interest on the land on which they 
had erected the wall – The decree was, thus, passed to remove 
the wall illegally erected by them – In the other suit, the Trial 
Court found that the defendants had put up a lintel of the school 
building on the wall of the plaintiff’s house illegally – A decree 
directing removal of the same and restraining the defendants 
from doing so in the future was passed – Both these decrees 
were upheld by the first Appellate Court – There was no prayer 
whatsoever made by the original plaintiff seeking any damages 
or compensation from the defendants for the encroachment 
committed by them – In absence of any such relief sought by the 
original plaintiff, the decree passed in his favour could not have 
been set aside by the High Court by compelling his legal heirs 
to accept compensation that was directed to be assessed by a 
valuer – The legal heirs of the plaintiff did not consent for such 
course to be followed – High Court could not have undertaken 
such exercise of seeking to compensate one party at the cost of 
the other without any prayer being made in that regard – Once 
the decrees passed by the Trial Court in favour of the plaintiff 
were set aside, there would be no occasion for the Executing 
Court to proceed with the execution proceedings since there 
would be no decree holding the field for being executed – Thus, 
directing the Executing Court to assess the value of the wall 
in question would be requiring it to undertake an exercise not 
supported by any decree whatsoever – The course adopted by 
the High Court does not find support u/Or.XXI, CPC – There 
being no prayer made by the original plaintiff in the suit for grant 
of any compensation nor any consent having been offered by 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
189
Rajat Kumar and Others v.  
S D Adarsh Jain Kanya Maha Vidyalaya Sadhaura and Others
the legal heirs of the plaintiff in that regard, the High Court could 
not have imposed such a direction on them, especially when 
there was a decree operating in their favour – Judgment of High 
Court unsustainable, set aside – High Court to re-consider both 
the appeals in accordance with s.100, CPC. [Paras 5(a)-(c), 6] 
List of Acts
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
List of Keywords
Mandatory injunction; No prayer made by plaintiff for grant of 
compensation; Prayer for monetary relief not made; No prayer 
was made for damages or compensation for encroachment; Legal 
heirs compelled to accept compensation; Decree for mandatory 
injunction; Removal of alleged encroachment; No substantial 
questions of law; Miscarriage of justice; Illegal encroachment.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 
19552-19553 of 2017
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.05.2016 of the High Court 
of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in RSA Nos. 363 and 364 
of 2008
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Sangeeta Kumar, Ms. Vidushi Garg.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Atul S. Chandurkar, J.
1.	
The appellants are the legal heirs of the original plaintiff-Om 
Parkash. The original plaintiff filed Civil Suit No.426 of 1996 against 
the respondents-original defendants seeking mandatory injunction 
for removal of alleged illegal encroachment in the form of a wall 
constructed by them on the common open space beyond the plaintiff’s 

190
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
house. He further sought permanent injunction seeking to restrain the 
defendants from raising any further construction thereon. The Trial 
Court on 06.02.2006 decreed the suit and directed the defendants 
to remove the encroachment committed by raising the said walls. It 
also restrained them from raising any further construction over the 
said walls.
Regular Civil Appeal No.137 of 2006 preferred by the defendants 
was dismissed on 05.09.2007 and the decree passed by the Trial 
Court was upheld. 
The defendants being aggrieved preferred Regular Second Appeal 
No.364 of 2008 before the Punjab and Haryana High Court1. By the 
judgment dated 25.11.2011, the High Court disposed the Second 
Appeal with a direction to the defendants to pay an amount of 
₹10,000/- with interest @ 12% per annum being half the amount 
of expenditure incurred on construction of the walls in question. It 
further held that on making such payment, the wall would be treated 
as ‘common’ between the parties. The legal heirs of the plaintiff 
challenged the reversal of the decree before this Court, reference 
to which would be made a bit later. 
2.	
The original plaintiff also filed another Civil Suit being CS No.148 
of 2000 against the same defendants, this time with a prayer for 
mandatory injunction for removal of lintel of the school building that 
had been erected by the defendants on the wall of the plaintiff’s 
house. The Trial Court by its judgment dated 08.11.2004 decreed 
the said suit and directed the defendants to remove the lintel of 
the school building from the said wall. The defendants were also 
restrained from putting any lintel on any wall of the plaintiff’s house. 
Being aggrieved, the plaintiff preferred Regular Civil Appeal No.143 
of 2004 which came to be dismissed by the first Appellate Court 
on 05.09.2007. Being aggrieved, the defendants preferred Regular 
Second Appeal No.363 of 2008 before the High Court. The Second 
Appeal was decided on 25.11.2011 and a similar decree directing the 
defendants to pay an amount of ₹7,000/- being half of the amount 
spent on construction of the wall with interest @ 12% per annum 
1	
For short, ‘the High Court’

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
191
Rajat Kumar and Others v.  
S D Adarsh Jain Kanya Maha Vidyalaya Sadhaura and Others
was passed. It was further directed that on making such payment, 
the wall would be treated as ‘common’ between the parties.
3.	
The legal heirs of the original plaintiff being aggrieved by the reversal 
of the aforesaid decrees by the High Court filed appeals before this 
Court. By order dated 13.09.2013 passed in Civil Appeal Nos.8203 
of 2013 and 8281 of 2013, it was held that the modification of the 
decrees by the High Court without entering into the merits of the 
controversy was impermissible. No substantial questions of law 
had been framed while deciding the Second Appeals. On these 
counts, the judgments delivered in the Second Appeals by the High 
Court were set aside and the proceedings were remanded for fresh 
consideration in accordance with law.
4.	
On remand, the High Court was of the view that the construction of 
the wall had been raised long back. There was no valuation report 
on record and the claim alleged to be put forth by the plaintiff had not 
been proved. By observing that the other party could be compensated 
in terms of money that could be assessed by a valuer and with a 
view to do justice between the parties, it directed the Executing 
Court to assess the value of the construction. The defendants were 
accordingly directed to deposit such amount in the Executing Court 
to be paid to the legal heirs of the plaintiff. With these directions, the 
decree passed by the Trial Court as affirmed by the first Appellate 
Court came to be set aside. 
The legal heirs of the original plaintiff are aggrieved by the reversal 
of the said decrees and have, thus, preferred the present appeals.
5.	
Despite service, there has been no appearance on behalf of the 
respondents since 23.04.2019. After hearing Ms. Sangeeta Kumar, 
learned counsel for the appellants and on perusal of the record, we 
are of the view that the High Court committed an error in reversing the 
decrees passed by the Trial Court and affirmed by the first Appellate 
Court on irrelevant considerations. We say so for the following reasons:
a)	
The initial suit filed by the original plaintiff was essentially for a 
decree for mandatory injunction seeking removal of the alleged 
encroachment undertaken at the behest of the defendants on 
the common open space beyond the construction of the plaintiff. 
According to the original plaintiff, such construction interfered 

192
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
with the right of the plaintiff to enjoy air and light through the 
ventilators as well as obstructed the passing of water through the 
common path. It found that the defendants could not prove any 
right, title or interest on the land on which they had erected the 
wall. The decree was, thus, passed to remove the wall illegally 
erected by them. In the other suit, the Trial Court found that 
the defendants had put up a lintel of the school building on the 
wall of the plaintiff’s house illegally. A decree directing removal 
of the same and restraining the defendants from doing so in 
the future was passed. Both these decrees were upheld by the 
first Appellate Court. There was no prayer whatsoever made 
by the original plaintiff seeking any damages or compensation 
from the defendants for the encroachment committed by them. 
In absence of any such relief sought by the original plaintiff, the 
decree passed in his favour could not have been set aside by the 
High Court by compelling his legal heirs to accept compensation 
that was directed to be assessed by a valuer. The legal heirs 
of the plaintiff did not consent for such course to be followed. 
The High Court, therefore, could not have undertaken such 
exercise of seeking to compensate one party at the cost of the 
other without any prayer being made in that regard.
b)	
The High Court by the impugned judgment reversed the decree 
for mandatory injunction for removal of encroachment passed 
by the Trial Court which was upheld by the first Appellate 
Court. It, however, directed the Executing Court to assess the 
value of the offending wall put up by the defendants so as to 
compensate the plaintiff in terms of money. Once the decrees 
passed by the Trial Court in favour of the plaintiff were set aside, 
there would be no occasion for the Executing Court to proceed 
with the execution proceedings since there would be no decree 
holding the field for being executed. In such a situation, directing 
the Executing Court to assess the value of the wall in question 
would be requiring it to undertake an exercise not supported 
by any decree whatsoever. Indeed, the course adopted by the 
High Court does not find support under Order XXI of the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 19082.
2	
For short, ‘the Code’

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
193
Rajat Kumar and Others v.  
S D Adarsh Jain Kanya Maha Vidyalaya Sadhaura and Others
c)	
The High Court ought to have been mindful of the fact that 
a similar exercise undertaken by it earlier while deciding the 
respective Second Appeals and directing the payment of 
compensation to the original plaintiff was set aside by this 
Court. The High Court, on remand however again committed 
the same error, this time by directing the Executing Court to 
undertake valuation of the wall in question so as to compensate 
the legal heirs of the plaintiff in monetary terms. There being 
no prayer made by the original plaintiff in the suit for grant of 
any compensation nor any consent having been offered by the 
legal heirs of the plaintiff in that regard, the High Court could 
not have imposed such a direction on them, especially when 
there was a decree operating in their favour.
d)	
The impugned order of the High Court proceeds on a factually 
wrong premise that the Trial Court in Civil Suit No.426 of 1996 
had recorded a finding that the wall in question was a common 
wall. No such finding was recorded by the Trial Court. In fact, 
a decree for removal of the offending wall came to be passed 
by the Trial Court. Further, though the High Court has referred 
to three questions in the impugned judgment and has stated 
that the defendants urged the Court to frame the said questions 
as ‘substantial questions of law’, the impugned order does not 
indicate that the said questions were treated as substantial 
questions of law. However, the order concludes by observing 
that the substantial questions were answered in favour of the 
defendants and the decree passed in favour of the original 
plaintiff was set aside. It is, thus, clear that without an available 
question of law for consideration and also by making out a new 
prayer, the decrees passed in favour of the original plaintiff 
have been set aside. The legal heirs of the plaintiff have been 
required to accept monetary relief for which a prayer was never 
made. Such course has resulted in miscarriage of justice. 
6.	
For all the aforesaid reasons, we find the judgment of the High 
Court to be unsustainable. Accordingly, the common judgment dated 
02.05.2016 passed in RSA No.363 of 2008 and 364 of 2008 by the 
High Court is set aside. Since the appeals have not been adjudicated 
on merits, there is no option but to request the High Court to re-
consider both the appeals in accordance with Section 100 of the 

194
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Code and decide the same on their own merits. Considering the 
fact that the Second Appeals are of the year 2008, we request the 
High Court to consider the same expeditiously. 
7.	
The Civil Appeals are allowed in aforesaid terms with no order as 
to costs. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
