[2026] 7 S.C.R. 208 : 2026 INSC 629
CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary
v.
Adani Infrastructure and Developers Private Limited
(Civil Appeal Diary No. 5988 of 2026)
01 June 2026
[Dipankar Datta* and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose that where an appeal u/s.62 IBC is filed within time, 
i.e., 45 (forty-five) days or beyond the said period but before expiry 
of 60 (sixty) days as contemplated in the sub-sections thereof and 
are marked defective, for whatever reason, whether this Court 
can condone the delay in refiling of the appeal when the defects 
pointed out are not cured within 28 (twenty-eight) days.
Headnotes†
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 – s.62 – Supreme Court 
Rules, 2013 – Ord.VIII r.6 Sub-rules (3) and (4) – Condonation 
of delay – Appeal u/s.62, at the instance of liquidator of a 
corporate debtor under liquidation challenging the order 
passed by NCLAT – Appeal presented beyond the period of 
limitation prescribed in s.62(1), but within the grace period 
stipulated in sub-section (2) – Office reported a delay of 7 
days in filing the appeal – Application seeking condonation of 
delay filed – Office also marked the appeal defective – Upon 
curing the defects, the appeal came to be re-filed after a further 
delay of 82 days, for which a separate application seeking 
condonation of the delay in re-filing also filed:
Held: 45 (forty-five) days is available under subsection (1) of s.62 
from date of receipt of the order of the NCLT to file an appeal 
involving a substantial question of law before this Court – As 
per sub-section (2), subject to sufficient cause being shown, the 
Supreme Court may allow an appeal to be filed within 15 (fifteen) 
days after the expiry of the said 45 (forty-five) days but not beyond – 
Curing of defects arising out of a defectively filed appeal u/s.62 
is permissible within 28 (twenty-eight) days of notification thereof 
by the Registry – If the defects are cured within 28 (twenty-eight) 
days, the appeal would deserve registration upon removal of the 
* Author

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
209
CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary v.  
Adani Infrastructure and Developers Private Limited
“D No.” – However, there being no scope for curing defects after 
lapse of the period of 28 (twenty-eight) days in respect of an 
appeal u/s.62, filing of an application for condonation of the delay 
in re-filing does not arise – Thus, no question of condonation of 
delay [even for a day beyond 60 (sixty) days (in case of an appeal 
which, apart from the little delay in filing beyond 45 (forty-five days), 
is otherwise defect-free) and 28 (twenty-eight) days (in case of 
a defective appeal)] arises for consideration – Where the statute 
itself erects an insurmountable jurisdictional bar, no enquiry into the 
adequacy of the cause shown would alter the legal consequence 
that inexorably follows – Upon a perusal of the applications 
seeking condonation of delay in filing and in re-filing, sufficient 
cause not shown to satisfactorily explain the delay – Absent any 
cogent or convincing justification, the delay in both the filing of 
the defective appeal and re-filing of the appeal not liable to be 
condoned – Defective appeal dismissed as time-barred having 
been filed beyond the maximum period condonable in terms of 
the IBC. [Paras 25-28]
Case Law Cited
Mobilox Innovations (P) Ltd. v. Kirusa Software (P) Ltd [2017] 
10 SCR 1006 : (2018) 1 SCC 353; Kalparaj Dharamshi v. Kotak 
Investment Advisors Limited [2021] 2 SCR 677 : (2021) 10 
SCC 401; National Spot Exchange Ltd. v. Dunar Foods Ltd. 
(Resolution Professional) [2021] 7 SCR 1024 : (2022) 11 SCC 
761; V. Nagarajan v. SKS Ispat & Power Ltd [2021] 14 SCR 736 : 
(2022) 2 SCC 244; Tata Steel Limited v. Raj Kumar Banerjee 
& Others [2025] 5 SCR 814 : (2025) 9 SCC 483; PEC Ltd. v. 
M/s Phulchand Exports Private Ltd., Civil Appeal (Diary) No. 
37293 of 2022; Saturn Ventures and Advisors Pvt. Limited v. S. 
Gopalakrishnan, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2484; CA Ramchandra 
Dallaram Choudhary v. Adani Infrastructure & Developers (P) Ltd., 
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1406 – referred to.
List of Acts
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016; Supreme Court Rules, 
2013; Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Appeal u/s.62 IBC; Marked defective; Condone the delay in 
refiling of appeal when defects pointed out not cured within 28 

210
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(twenty-eight) days; Condonation of delay; Liquidator of corporate 
debtor under liquidation; Appeal presented beyond the period of 
limitation; Curing of the defects.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Diary No. 
5988 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 08.12.2025 of the National 
Company Law Appellate Tribunal in CAAT (I) No. 2316 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Sunil Fernandes, Abhijeet Sinha, Sr. Advs., Atul Sharma, Pankaj 
Jain, Ms. Aditi Sharma, Vikram Choudhary, Shubham Bhalla.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Balbir Singh, Sr. Adv., Ms. Hetu Arora Sethi, Anirudh Bhat, Siddarth 
Agarwal, Shamik Bhatt, Sanidhya Kumar, Vedant Kohli.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Dipankar Datta, J.
1.	
This is an appeal under Section 62 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy 
Code, 20161, at the instance of the liquidator of a corporate debtor 
under liquidation. Under challenge is the judgment and order dated 
08th December, 20252 passed by the National Company Law Appellate 
Tribunal, Principal Bench at New Delhi3 in Comp. App. (AT) (Ins) 
No.2316 of 2024.
2.	
Having regard to the point on which we propose to decide the appeal, 
we see no reason to comment on the correctness or otherwise of 
the impugned order.
3.	
The appeal was presented on 29th January 2026, beyond the period 
of limitation prescribed in sub-section (1) of Section 62, IBC but within 
1	
IBC
2	
impugned order
3	
NCLAT

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
211
CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary v.  
Adani Infrastructure and Developers Private Limited
the grace period stipulated in sub-section (2) thereof. Office reported 
a delay of 7 (seven) days in filing the appeal. An application seeking 
condonation of the said delay has been filed. Office had also marked 
the appeal defective. Upon curing the defects, the appeal came to 
be re-filed after a further delay of 82 (eighty-two) days for which a 
separate application seeking condonation of delay in re-filing has 
also been filed. 
4.	
At the outset, it must be borne in mind that the scheme of limitation 
under the IBC is a strict and time-bound one. The concept of 
condonation of delay itself is alien to the statutory framework beyond 
the period expressly contemplated under the statute. Section 62 
of the IBC permits an appeal to be filed before this Court within 
45 (forty-five) days, with a further grace period of only 15 (fifteen) 
days, and that too, only upon sufficient cause being shown. Thus, 
the outer limit statutorily permissible is 60 (sixty) days, beyond 
which the appeal itself becomes barred and the Court’s jurisdiction 
to condone the delay ceases.
5.	
The importance of strict adherence to timelines under the IBC has 
been enunciated by this Court succinctly in its decision in Mobilox 
Innovations (P) Ltd. v. Kirusa Software (P) Ltd.4 as follows:
36. … Even in appeals to the Supreme Court from the 
Appellate Tribunal under Section 62, 45 days’ time is 
given from the date of receipt of the order of the Appellate 
Tribunal in which an appeal to the Supreme Court is to be 
made, with a further grace period not exceeding 15 days. 
The strict adherence of these timelines is of essence to 
both the triggering process and the insolvency resolution 
process. … .
6.	
Time bound resolution is the essence of the IBC was reiterated 
in respect of an appeal under Section 61 thereof in Kalparaj 
Dharamshi v. Kotak Investment Advisors Limited5 in the following 
words:
158. This Court has held, that it is not open to the adjudicating 
authority or appellate authority to reckon any other factor 
4	
(2018) 1 SCC 353
5	
(2021) 10 SCC 401

212
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
other than specified in Sections 30(2) or 61(3) of the I&B 
Code. It has further been held, that the commercial wisdom 
of CoC has been given paramount status without any judicial 
intervention for ensuring completion of the stated processes 
within the timelines prescribed by the I&B Code. … .
(emphasis ours)
7.	
Reference can also be made to the decisions in National Spot 
Exchange Ltd. v. Dunar Foods Ltd. (Resolution Professional)6, V. 
Nagarajan v. SKS Ispat & Power Ltd7 and Tata Steel Limited v. Raj 
Kumar Banerjee and Others8 which, though arising in the context 
of appeals under Section 61 of the IBC, reaffirm that condonation 
of delay beyond the period expressly prescribed by the statute itself 
would be impermissible.
8.	
Furthermore, this Court in PEC Ltd. v. M/s Phulchand Exports 
Private Ltd.9 held pithily as follows:
1 There is a delay of 21 days in filing the appeal under 
Section 62 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 
2016. The delay is beyond the maximum period which is 
condonable in terms of the statute. 
2 Hence, the civil appeal is dismissed on the ground of 
limitation. 
3 Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
9.	
In Saturn Ventures and Advisors Pvt. Limited v. S. Gopalakrishnan10, 
delay of two days in presentation of an appeal under Section 62 of 
the IBC was not condoned reasoning that the Court has no power 
to condone the delay.
10.	 Let us now ascertain what the position is under the Supreme Court 
Rules, 201311. Sub-rules (3) and (4), of Rule 6 of Order VIII, SCR, 
lay down the regime governing re-filing of, inter alia, petitions and 
6	
(2022) 11 SCC 761
7	
(2022) 2 SCC 244
8	
(2025) 9 SCC 483
9	
Civil Appeal (Diary) No. 37293 of 2022
10	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2484
11	
SCR

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
213
CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary v.  
Adani Infrastructure and Developers Private Limited
appeals after curing defects. A period of 28 (twenty-eight) days is 
earmarked for curing of defects. A litigant not curing the defects within 
28 (twenty-eight) days may re-file the petition or the appeal, as the 
case may be, together with an application seeking condonation of 
re-filing delay. Needless to observe, condonation of re-filing delay 
for petitions and appeals is discretionary. 
11.	 Is it open to this Court [where an appeal under Section 62, IBC is 
filed within time, i.e., 45 (forty-five) days or beyond the said period but 
before expiry of 60 (sixty) days as contemplated in the sub-sections 
thereof and are marked defective, for whatever reason] to condone 
the delay in re-filing of the appeal when the defects pointed out are 
not cured within 28 (twenty-eight) days? This was the question we 
posed to Mr. Fernandes, learned senior counsel for the appellant 
to answer.
12.	 Mr. Fernandes contends that the appellant is a neutral officer acting 
under the aegis of this Court for the benefit of all stakeholders as 
well as the corporate debtor under liquidation and having regard 
to the nature of duties imposed on him, the insignificant delay in 
filing the appeal as well as re-filing thereof ought to be considered 
liberally rather than strictly. He also contends, notwithstanding that the 
defects were not cured within 28 (twenty-eight) days of such defects 
being notified, this Court’s power to condone re-filing delay of any 
number of days beyond 28 (twenty-eight) days is not fettered and if 
sufficient cause be shown to exist, which did preclude a party from 
acting within the timelines provided in the IBC, re-filing delay of any 
length of time is invariably condoned. According to him, under the 
SCR, delay in re-filing after curing of the defects is treated differently 
from delay in initial filing. If initially the appeal is filed within 45 (forty-
five) days, or even within the grace period of 15 (fifteen) days and 
sufficient cause for condonation of filing delay is shown, the Court 
would generally condone the delay – in filing and re-filing - if the 
same is satisfactorily explained. 
13.	 Mr. Fernandes has, in this connection, invited our attention to 
a coordinate Bench decision between the same parties in CA 
Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary v. Adani Infrastructure & 
Developers (P) Ltd.12 where re-filing delay in filing an appeal before 
12	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1406 

214
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the NCLAT under Section 61 of the IBC was condoned. Particular 
reliance was placed on the following passages:
9. Be that as it may, it is well-recognised principle of law 
that the courts view applications relating to lawyer’s lapses 
more leniently than applications relating to litigant’s lapses. 
The classic example is the difference in approach of courts 
to applications for condonation of delay in filing an appeal 
and applications for the condonation of delay in refilling 
the appeal after rectification of defects. Useful reference 
may be made to the decision of the co-ordinate Bench of 
this Court in Perumon Bhagvathy Devaswom v.  Bhargavi 
Amma [(2008) 8 SCC 321; 2008 SCC OnLine SC 1049.]
10. Having regard to the fact that the appellant despite 
limitations had done all that was necessary for filing of the 
appeal within 30 days, and then 15 days, i.e., within the 
prescribed and extended period of limitation, respectively, 
as well as dependency of the appellant on its lawyers who, 
in turn, were dependent on their clerk to refile the appeal, 
and there were some missteps contributing to the present 
situation, coupled with the fact that the issue sought to 
be raised by the appellant in the appeal filed before the 
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal, if answered in 
its favour, would enure to the benefit of the debtors, and 
also that better justice is always achieved when a lis is 
decided on a contested hearing rather than on default, 
we need to take an overall view of the matter. We are of 
the considered opinion that the words “sufficient cause” in 
this case ought to have been construed liberally and that 
interest of justice would be best served if, upon condonation 
of delay in refilling of the appeal, the National Company 
Law Appellate Tribunal proceeds with the hearing of the 
appeal on merits. Ordered accordingly.
14.	 We propose to advert to the decision in CA Ramchandra Dallaram 
Choudhary (supra) a little later. 
15.	 Having regard to the statutory scheme of the IBC, since validated 
by this Court in numerous decisions by holding that the strict 
timelines are meant to prevent misuse by dilatory tactics, it is 
difficult to accept Mr. Fernandes’ contention. It is axiomatic that an 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
215
CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary v.  
Adani Infrastructure and Developers Private Limited
appeal under Section 62 of the IBC to be regarded as having been 
instituted within the prescribed period of 45 (forty-five) days must be 
a defect-free appeal, which is capable of being acted upon by the 
Registry for being immediately placed before the appropriate Bench 
for consideration. Any appeal which is not filed within the stipulated 
period in a form shorn of defects, for all practical and legal purposes, 
remains a defective appeal. 
16.	 Can or should a litigant be permitted to circumvent the rigours of 
limitation by filing a defective appeal as a device to save limitation 
and, thereafter, to opt to cure the notified defects at leisure? Can or 
should this Court countenance such a practice? The answers to both 
questions have to be a resounding ‘NO’. To hold otherwise would defeat 
the object of the IBC and render nugatory the discipline of timelines 
engrafted both in Section 62 as well as the SCR. Any such practice 
of filing a defective appeal, if encouraged, could result in a litigant 
dragging the process of re-filing for months and still being heard on 
his application for condoning re-filing delay premised on the ground 
that the IBC says nothing about re-filing delay and that the SCR being 
a procedural law must be read in a manner to aid the rendering of 
substantive justice to a party who is shown to be above board. 
17.	 Consequently, no litigant can be permitted to subvert the statutory 
scheme by seeking condonation of re-filing delay beyond the period of 
28 (twenty-eight) days after having initially lodged a defective appeal. 
Once the window of 60 (sixty) days prescribed by the IBC, followed 
by the window of 28 (twenty-eight) days in re-filing the appeal upon 
curing of defects permitted by the SCR is shut, the right to appeal 
stands extinguished. 
18.	 The argument that the SCR does not impose a cap beyond which 
re-filing delays cannot be condoned and, hence, it is the acceptability 
of the cause shown amounting to ‘sufficient cause’ which is and 
should be decisive, irrespective of the length of time taken to cure 
the defects, is equally unimpressive. The SCR is the subordinate 
legislation in the field and whenever the IBC and the SCR clash, the 
latter cannot override the express provisions of the former. The IBC 
must prevail being the statutory edict. Though indisputable that the 
standards for examining a prayer for condoning a re-filing delay is 
certainly less rigorous than a filing delay but such standard would 
stand true and be applicable for the general laws, like proceedings 

216
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
arising from the Codes of Civil and Criminal Procedure, as well as 
from remedies provided by the Constitution of India. Section 62, 
IBC is, however, a complete code in itself for filing of appeals and is 
different from other laws. An appeal under Section 62, IBC does not 
remain alive after the 28 (twenty-eight) day period allowable under 
the SCR for curing defects and the lis would stand frozen once 
the defects are not cured within such period. An extended window 
cannot be granted de hors the legislative intent behind stipulation 
of the strict timelines in the IBC. 
19.	 We may also observe that the fact of the appellant being a neutral 
officer acting under the aegis of this Court for the benefit of all 
stakeholders and the corporate debtor under liquidation is not 
sufficient for us to invoke our extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 
142 of the Constitution to dilute or override the express statutory 
timeframes engrafted under the IBC. Pertinently, the IBC does not 
mark a different threshold for officers like the appellant and hence, 
reading words into the statute which are not used by the legislature 
would not be a permissible interpretational exercise. 
20.	 Moving on to the decision in CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary 
(supra), which has been pressed into service by Mr. Fernandes, the 
peculiar factual matrix of the said appeal assumes significance and 
warrants a recapitulation of the events.
a.	
Appellant had earlier challenged the order dated 21st June, 
2024 passed by the National Company Law Tribunal13 before 
the NCLAT in an appeal under Section 61, IBC. However, the 
appeal before the NCLAT itself was not filed within the prescribed 
period and was beset by delay in re-filing. 
b.	
Vide its order dated 6th February, 2025, the NCLAT declined to 
condone the delay. Aggrieved thereby, the appellant approached 
this Court by filing an appeal14 under Section 62, IBC. This 
Court, by its order dated 5th May, 2025, set aside the order 
of the NCLAT and remanded the matter for consideration on 
merits, whereupon the NCLAT proceeded to decide the appeal 
and delivered the impugned order.
13	
NCLT
14	
Civil Appeal No. 5106 of 2025

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
217
CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary v.  
Adani Infrastructure and Developers Private Limited
c.	
Significantly, while concluding its order dated 5th May, 2025, 
this Court specifically recorded that such order is not to be 
treated as a precedent. 
21.	 It would, therefore, appear that notwithstanding the indulgence shown 
by this Court to the self-same appellant at an earlier stage, the appeal 
presently under consideration has been re-filed after substantial delay. 
The explanation for the re-filing delay reads as follows:
4. That it is most humbly submitted that essentially the 
delay in refiling arose due to an internal oversight within 
the Office of the Liquidator. While the defects were duly 
communicated by the Registry, a concerned officer within 
the Liquidator’s office either mistakenly believed that the 
requisite details had already been conveyed or did not 
promptly relay them to the Advocate-on Record. It is also 
pertinent to mention that this officer has since left the 
position, leading to a gap in communication. The delay, 
thus, was neither intentional nor negligent but arose from 
a bona fide administrative lapse within the office.
(emphasis ours)
22.	 The circumstance that this Court had earlier interdicted refusal of the 
NCLAT to condone the delay in re-filing the appeal under Section 61 
of the IBC does not advance the appellant’s case, rather even on 
a cursory comparison of the two situations, it only accentuates the 
reason as to why the earlier exercise of discretion cannot be extended 
to the present proceedings. While setting aside the order of the 
NCLAT, this Court had emphasized the differing degrees of liberality, 
which ought to be extended in the cases of lapses attributable to 
the advocate-on-record and to the litigant, as far as re-filing delay 
is concerned. It was in this factual milieu, the controversy warranted 
examination on merits, thereby necessitating the condonation of 
delay in re-filing of the appeal before the NCLAT and restoration of 
the appeal before it. 
23.	 The decision in CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary (supra) 
reiterates the principle which must guide the exercise of judicial 
discretion in matters of condonation of delay. The present case 
stands on an entirely different pedestal, wherein the appellant 
seeks condonation not merely of delay in re-filing but also of delay 

218
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in invoking the appellate jurisdiction of this Court under Section 62, 
IBC. Importantly so, the appellant approaches this Court after having 
availed the benefit of a liberal construction of “sufficient cause” at the 
previous stage of the same litigation. A litigant who has once secured 
indulgence in relation to delay cannot legitimately proceed on the 
assumption that further defaults engendered at the next appellate 
stage would automatically attract a similar exercise of discretion. 
To hold otherwise would render the law of limitation under the IBC 
progressively elastic at every successive stage of challenge, defeating 
the legislative objective of expedition and finality.
24.	 Restating what has already been enunciated, the appellant can 
derive no advantage from the earlier order condoning the delay in 
re-filing the appeal under Section 61, IBC before the NCLAT. That 
exercise of discretion was confined to the peculiar facts of that case 
and cannot be construed as a warrant for repeated indulgence. The 
discipline of limitation, particularly in the context of the IBC, does 
not countenance serial condonations of delay across successive 
appellate stages. Having once availed the benefit of a liberal 
approach, the appellant cannot legitimately seek a further relaxation 
when the present appeal under Section 62 is itself beset by delay 
both in filing and in re-filing.
25.	 To sum up our discussion, 45 (forty-five) days is available under sub-
section (1) of Section 62, IBC from date of receipt of the order of the 
NCLT to file an appeal involving a substantial question of law before 
this Court. As per sub-section (2), subject to sufficient cause being 
shown, the Supreme Court may allow an appeal to be filed within 
15 (fifteen) days after the expiry of the said 45 (forty-five) days but 
not beyond. Curing of defects arising out of a defectively filed appeal 
under Section 62, IBC is permissible within 28 (twenty-eight) days 
of notification thereof by the Registry. If the defects are cured within 
28 (twenty-eight) days, the appeal would deserve registration upon 
removal of the “D No.”. However, there being no scope for curing 
defects after lapse of the period of 28 (twenty-eight) days in respect 
of an appeal under Section 62, IBC, filing of an application for re-filing 
delay does not arise. Consequently, no question of condonation of 
delay [even for a day beyond 60 (sixty) days (in case of an appeal 
which, apart from the little delay in filing beyond 45 (forty-five days), 
is otherwise defect-free) and 28 (twenty-eight) days (in case of a 
defective appeal)] arises for consideration.

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
219
CA Ramchandra Dallaram Choudhary v.  
Adani Infrastructure and Developers Private Limited
26.	 Thus, the legal position being settled beyond cavil, it is unnecessary 
for us to venture into the merits of the explanations furnished in 
support of the applications for condonation of delay in filing and 
re-filing herein. Where the statute itself erects an insurmountable 
jurisdictional bar, no enquiry into the adequacy of the cause shown 
would alter the legal consequence that inexorably follows.
27.	 Apart from what has been held above, upon a perusal of the 
applications seeking condonation of delay in filing and in re-filing, 
we find sufficient cause not having been shown to satisfactorily 
explain the delay(s). Absent any cogent or convincing justification, 
the delay(s) in both the filing of the defective appeal and re-filing of 
the appeal are not liable to be condoned. 
28.	 Be that as it may, the defective appeal stands dismissed as time-
barred having been filed beyond the maximum period condonable 
in terms of the IBC.
29.	 Connected applications too stand dismissed. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
