[2026] 7 S.C.R. 101 : 2026 INSC 637
The Commissioner, Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike
v.
K.K. Umesh Kumar & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 8455 of 2026)
11 June 2026
[Sanjay Karol* and Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the appellant can be held liable under the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 for the injuries sustained by respondent 
no.1 that were caused due to the falling of a roadside tree on 
the vehicle by which the respondent no.1 was travelling, but had 
stopped under the tree waiting for the rain to subside and then 
proceed further.
Headnotes†
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 – Compensation – Claim petition – 
Falling of a tree on an auto, if would qualify as an accident 
for which claim can be filed – Respondent was traveling in 
auto and due to heavy rain, stopped under the tree waiting 
for the rain to subside and then proceed – However, branch 
of the tree got detached and fell on the top of the vehicle, 
injuring the respondent who was then admitted to the 
hospital and received treatment – Claim petition filed seeking 
compensation – Tribunal dismissed the petition on the ground 
that the incident was a natural calamity – In the first round, 
the High Court dismissed the matter on the point of delay – In 
the second round, the High Court awarded Rs.17,10,500/- as 
compensation and, directed the Insurance Company of the 
auto to pay 50% of the amount, while the appellant and the 
State Horticulture Department were to pay one-fourth each – 
Challenge to:
Held: In view of the liberal interpretation of the term ‘use’, in 
ordinary circumstances, the presence of the respondent in the 
auto rickshaw suffice as ‘use’ – Motor vehicle itself does not play 
an active role in the accident – It is not part of the proximate 
cause of the accident, thus, a claim u/s.166 specifically may not 
be appropriate – However, person who has suffered such life 
* Author

102
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
altering grievous injuries, being left in lurch, without any money to 
sustain himself, does not appeal to the conscience of justice – It 
is within the domain of this Court, as the final Court to ensure the 
law, as implemented, specially in cases like these, is humane and 
in accordance with the salutary principles of the Constitution – 
Compensation as determined by the High Court, insufficient, 
owing to technical approach adopted by the High Court – In view 
thereof, total compensation enhanced to Rs.25,00,000/- along 
with interest as determined by the High Court, to be calculated 
from the date of filing of the claim petition – Apportionment of 
liability remain undisturbed – Constitution of India – Art.142. 
[Paras 13, 15]
Case Law Cited
S. Vedantacharya v. Highways Deptt. of South Arcot (1987) 3 SCC 
400; Vohra Sadikbhai Rajakbhai v. State of Gujarat [2016] 2 SCR 
772 : (2016) 12 SCC 1; Rajkot Municipal Corpn. v. Manjulben 
Jayantilal Nakum [1997] 1 SCR 304 : (1997) 9 SCC 552; Shivaji 
Dayanu Patil v. Vatschala Uttam More [1991] 3 SCR 26 : (1991) 
3 SCC 530 – referred to.
Nichols v. Marsland (1876) 2 Ex D 1; Rylands v. Fletcher (1868) 
LR 3 HL 330; Greenock Corporation v. Caledonian Railway Co, 
[1917] UKHL 3; The Majestic, 166 U.S.375 (1897) – referred to.
List of Acts
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Injuries sustained due to falling of a roadside tree on the vehicle; 
Compensation; Falling of a tree on an auto, if would qualify as 
accident to file claim; Incident was natural calamity; Apportionment 
of liability.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
8455 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.09.2020 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in MFA No. 6470 of 2015.

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
103
The Commissioner, Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike v. 
K.K. Umesh Kumar & Ors.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Anand Sanjay M Nuli, Sr. Adv., Suraj Kaushik, Shiva Swaroop, 
M/S. Nuli & Nuli.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Shweta Garg, Pankaj Seth, Ms. Manjeet Chawla, Ms. Jyoti, 
Ms. Shruti Jain, Ms. Sheetal Sharma, Ms. Patil Rekha Chandra 
Gouda.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
Leave Granted.
2.	
The issue for our consideration is whether the appellant can be held 
liable under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 for the injuries sustained 
by respondent no.1 that were caused due to the falling of a roadside 
tree on the vehicle by which the respondent no.1 was travelling, but 
had stopped under the tree waiting for the rain to subside and then 
proceed further.
3.	
The facts in which this question arose are as follows:
Respondent no.1 was travelling on 23rd June 2007 in an auto from 
Queens Road to Chinnaswamy Stadium when due to heavy rain 
it was requested by respondent no.1 that the vehicle be pulled 
up to the side of the road. Along the road were older trees, some 
even as old as hundred years and when the vehicle was stationary 
underneath one of these trees, a branch got detached from the tree 
fell on top, injuring the respondent. Thereafter, he was admitted to 
Mallya Hospital and received treatment. 
A claim petition1 was filed before the Motor Accidents Claim Tribunal, 
Bangalore, seeking compensation of Rs.50 lakhs. The Claims 
Tribunal in terms of order dated 10th April 2013 dismissed the claim 
1	
MVC No.1313/2020

104
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
on account of it being a natural calamity. The High Court of Karnataka 
at Bangaluru2 dismissed the claim on the point of delay. This is the 
proceeding in the first round. This concurrent dismissal was challenged 
before this Court3 which remanded the matter on the point of non-
condonation of delay. In the second round of proceedings, the High 
Court allowed the appeal and awarded 17,10,500/- out of which 25% 
was directed to be paid by the appellant herein, 50% was to be paid 
by the Insurer of the autorickshaw and further 25% by respondent 
no.4-Horticulture Department, Government of Karnataka. It is this 
apportionment of liability towards the appellant which has been 
challenged before us. 
4.	
We have heard learned senior counsel and counsel appearing for 
the parties. 
5.	
In essence, the case of the appellant as also respondent no.4 that is 
the Horticulture Department, State of Karnataka is that they bore no 
responsibility for the unfortunate act that has quite literally, befallen 
respondent no.1. What happened was a natural occurrence over 
which the State authorities obviously had no control. That being 
the case, we must understand the position of law when it comes to 
such natural calamities, or in other words, the cases that deal with 
the proposition of ‘Act of God’.
6.	
Naturally, let us turn to the House of Lords to understand the origins 
of the doctrine. In Nichols v. Marsland 4, the Court of Appeal had 
a case where the respondent had, on his land, artificial ponds with 
built-in safety mechanisms allowing excess water to flow out. Due 
to an incident of extremely heavy rainfall, there was a lot of excess 
water which flowed into the plaintiff’s land. He claimed damages under 
the strict liability rule of Rylands v. Fletcher5, however outcome was 
in favour of the defendant since the flooding was not reasonably 
foreseeable. ‘Act of God’ or ‘Vis Major’ was accepted as a defence 
to strict liability. Next, we must consider Greenock Corporation v. 
2	
MFA No.6470/2015 (MV)
3	
Civil Appeal No.20865/2017
4	
(1876) 2 Ex D 1.
5	
(1868) LR 3 HL 330

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
105
The Commissioner, Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike v. 
K.K. Umesh Kumar & Ors.
Caledonian Railway Co6 in this case, flooding of an artificially created 
public playground and paddling pool which eventually damaged the 
nearby land that belonged to the respondent. The House of Lords 
eventually dismissed the Plaintiff’s claim of damnum fatale since 
they had altered the course of the stream. The Supreme Court 
of the United States in its 1897 decision titled The Majestic7 
discussed the rule as follows: 
“The act of God, said Chancellor Kent (vol. 2, p. 597), 
means “inevitable accident, without the intervention of 
man and public enemies” and again (vol. 3, p. 216) that 
“perils of the sea denote natural accidents peculiar to that 
element, which do not happen by the intervention of man, 
nor are to be prevented by human prudence.”
A “casus fortuitous” was defined in the civil law to be 
quod damno fatali contingit, cuivis diligentissimo possit 
contingere. It is a ‘loss happening in spite of all human 
effort and sagacity.’ The words ‘perils of the sea’ may 
indeed have grown to have a broader signification than 
‘the act of God,’ but that is unimportant here.
Judge Shipman in the Court of Appeals quotes from 1 
Parsons on Shipping 255, the definition there given of the 
“act of God,” and the reason for it, as follows:
“The ‘act of God’ is limited to causes in which no man has 
any agency whatever, because it was never intended to 
raise, in the case of the common carrier, the dangerous 
and difficult question whether he actually had any agency 
in causing the loss; for if this were possible, he should 
be held.”
7.	
We now move to the decisions of this Court. In S. Vedantacharya v. 
Highways Deptt. of South Arcot 8, this Court observed that when it 
comes to bridges and culverts, heavy rain or flood are not possibilities 
outside the contemplation of the department concerned. Since there 
6	
[1917] UKHL 3
7	
166 U.S.375 (1897)
8	
(1987) 3 SCC 400

106
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
was nothing on record in the case to show that the concerned 
department had taken any preventive action, the finding of the High 
Court dismissing the claim was overturned and judgment was entered 
for the plaintiffs. Another case was Vohra Sadikbhai Rajakbhai v. 
State of Gujarat 9 wherein certain landowners claimed compensation 
on account of severe damage and submersion of their lands leading 
to widespread loss of crops and other vegetation. The same was 
resisted, averring that there had been a great amount of rainfall 
leading to the dam being overfilled, necessitating 60000 cusecs of 
water having to be released in order to protect the dam. The Court 
in order to complete justice gave Rs 5 lacs as compensation against 
a claim of Rs.21,50,000/-: 
“22. There are two exceptions to the aforesaid rule of 
strict liability, which were recognised in Rylands v. Fletcher 
[Rylands v. Fletcher, (1868) LR 3 HL 330 : 37 LJ Ex 161] 
itself viz.:
(a) where it can be shown that the escape was owing to 
the plaintiff’s default, or
(b) the escape was the consequence of vis major or the 
act of God.
An act of God is that which is a direct, violent, sudden 
and irresistible act of nature as could not, by any amount 
of ability, have been foreseen, or if foreseen, could 
not by any amount of human care and skill have been 
resisted. Generally, those acts which are occasioned 
by the elementary forces of nature, unconnected with 
the agency of man or other cause will come under the 
category of acts of God. Examples are : storm, tempest, 
lightning, extraordinary fall of rain, extraordinary high tide, 
extraordinary severe frost, or a tidal bore which sweeps a 
ship in mid-water. What is important here is that it is not 
necessary that it should be unique or that it should happen 
for the first time. It is enough that it is extraordinary and 
such as could not reasonably be anticipated. We would 
9	
(2016) 12 SCC 1

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
107
The Commissioner, Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike v. 
K.K. Umesh Kumar & Ors.
like to discuss a few cases having bearing on this issue 
with which we are confronted in the instant appeal.”
8.	
Before proceeding further, we must also deal with Rajkot Municipal 
Corpn. v. Manjulben Jayantilal Nakum10 on which extensive reliance 
has been placed by the appellants. In that case, the deceased 
Jayantilal, was walking on the footpath when a tree fell upon him, 
leading to grievous injuries and eventual death. Against the claim 
of Rs.1,00,000/- against the appellant Corporation, the Trial Court 
granted the claim to the extent of Rs.45,000/-. The same was 
confirmed by the High Court on appeal. This Court, in its detailed 
judgment considered extensively the concept of negligence, the duty 
of municipal authorities etc. in the following words:
“59. … When the defendant is under a statutory duty to 
take care not to create latent source of physical danger 
to the property or the person who in the circumstances is 
considered to be reasonably foreseeable as likely to be 
affected thereby, the defendant would be liable for tort 
of negligence. If the latent defect causes actual physical 
damages to the person, the defendant is liable to damages 
for tortious liability. The negligent act or omission of the 
statutory authority must be examined with reference to the 
statutory provisions, creating the duty and the resultant 
consequences. The negligent act or omission must be 
specifically directed to safeguard the public or some 
sections of the public to which the plaintiff was a member, 
from the particular danger which has resulted.”
9.	
In view of the law as discussed above, let us move to applying the law. 
A tree has been on the side of the road for many years. Because it is 
part of the city, the Municipal Corporation does have a duty to ensure 
that those trees are looked after, from the point of view of not only 
keeping the trees hale and healthy but also that periodic maintenance 
thereof is undertaken to ensure that unfortunate incidents such as 
these do not happen. It is a reality that the boundaries of City are 
ever expanding in India, in view of the constant migration, and so the 
10	
(1997) 9 SCC 552

108
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
number of people that a Corporation is serving increases overtime. It 
would be unrealistic to expect that authorities of the Corporation can 
maintain a constant vigil over each tree/shrub. In the similar vein, 
while it may be perfectly within contemplation that an old branch of 
an old tree may give way at any time, the prudent call cannot be 
that all branches are slashed with a saw. 
10.	 The importance of trees especially in the ever-expanding concrete 
jungles that we call cities today cannot be overstated. In our city of 
Delhi, for example, we find vast differences in green cover depending 
on the area you travel to. In such a situation, it is the primary duty 
of Centre and state level authorities to increase greencover in cities 
howsoever possible, with due consultation from experts facilitating 
the long term survival of each tree or plant sown into the soil. 
11.	 Let it be stated, lest we be misunderstood that we are not even for 
a moment trivializing the injuries of the respondent or affording any 
escape to the appellant from its duty of maintaining the trees in the 
city. All that we are saying is that in the facts and circumstances of 
this case neither was taking a shelter under the tree was anything 
out of the ordinary nor was the unfortunate falling of a branch within 
contemplation of any Authority or even the driver of the autorickshaw. 
In these circumstances, it would be unfair to fasten the liability upon 
the appellant under the MVA. Under Section 166, MVA a claim can 
be filed for an accident as described in Section 165(1). The latter 
reads as follows:
“165. Claims Tribunals.—(1) A State Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute one or 
more Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as Claims Tribunal) for such area as 
may be specified in the notification for the purpose of 
adjudicating upon claims for compensation in respect of 
accidents involving the death of, or bodily injury to, persons 
arising out of the use of motor vehicles, or damages to 
any property of a third party so arising, or both. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that the expression “claims for compensation 
in respect of accidents involving the death of or bodily 
injury to persons arising out of the use of motor vehicles” 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
109
The Commissioner, Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike v. 
K.K. Umesh Kumar & Ors.
includes claims for compensation under section 140 [and 
section 163A]…”
(emphasis supplied)
12.	 The question that arises is whether the falling of a tree on an 
autorickshaw, would qualify as an accident for which a claim can 
be filed. The phrase emphasised by us in the Section above was, 
in its corresponding form in the preceding legislation interpreted by 
this Court in Shivaji Dayanu Patil v. Vatschala Uttam More11, :
“26. These decisions indicate that the word “use”, in the 
context of motor vehicles, has been construed in a wider 
sense to include the period when the vehicle is not moving 
and is stationary, being either parked on the road and when 
it is not in a position to move due to some breakdown or 
mechanical defect. … In our opinion, the word “use” has a 
wider connotation to cover the period when the vehicle is 
not moving and is stationary and the use of a vehicle does 
not cease on account of the vehicle having been rendered 
immobile on account of a breakdown or mechanical defect 
or accident. In the circumstances, it cannot be said that 
the petrol tanker was not in the use at the time when it 
was lying on its side after the collision with the truck.
…
33. …The words “arising out of” were not construed to mean 
“arising under” as in Union of India v. E.B. Aaby’s Rederi 
A/S [1975 AC 797 : (1974) 2 All ER 874] which decision 
was held inapplicable to the construction of Section 
20(2)(1)(h) and it was observed by Lord Brand-on:
“With regard to the first point, I would readily 
accept that in certain contexts the expression 
‘arising out of’ may, on the ordinary and natural 
meaning of the words used, be the equivalent of 
the expression ‘arising under’, and not that of the 
wider expression ‘connected with’. In my view, 
11	
(1991) 3 SCC 530

110
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
however, the expression ‘arising out of’ is, on 
the ordinary and natural meaning of the words 
used, capable, in other contexts, of being the 
equivalent of the wider expression ‘connected 
with’. Whether the expression ‘arising out of’ 
has the narrower or the wider meaning in any 
particular case must depend on the context in 
which it is used.”
Keeping in view the context in which the expression was 
used in the statute it was construed to have the wider 
meaning viz. “connected with”.
34. In the context of motor accidents the expressions 
“caused by” and “arising out of” are often used in statutes. 
Although both these expressions imply a causal relationship 
between the accident resulting in injury and the use of the 
motor vehicle but they differ in the degree of proximity 
of such relationship. This distinction has been lucidly 
brought out in the decision of the High Court of Australia 
in Government Insurance Office of N.S.W. v. R.J. Green 
case [(1965) 114 CLR 437], wherein Lord Barwick, C.J. 
has stated : (CLR p. 433)
“Bearing in mind the general purpose of the Act 
I think the expression ‘arising out of’ must be 
taken to require a less proximate relationship of 
the injury to the relevant use of the vehicle than 
is required to satisfy the words ‘caused by’. It 
may be that an association of the injury with the 
use of the vehicle while it cannot be said that 
that use was causally related to the injury may 
yet be enough to satisfy the expression ‘arise 
out of’ as used in the Act and in the policy.”
35. In the same case, Windeyer, J. has observed as 
under : (CLR p. 447)
“The words ‘injury caused by or arising out of the 
use of the vehicle’ postulate a causal relationship 
between the use of the vehicle and the injury. 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
111
The Commissioner, Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike v. 
K.K. Umesh Kumar & Ors.
‘Caused by’ connotes a ‘direct’ or ‘proximate’ 
relationship of cause and effect. ‘Arising out of’ 
extends this to a result that is less immediate; 
but it still carries a sense of consequence.”
13.	 In view of the stated liberal interpretation of this term, will the presence 
of the respondent in the auto rickshaw suffice as ‘use’. In ordinary 
circumstances, it probably would have. But take for instance a scenario 
where the respondent was a pedestrian and stood near or under the 
tree in an attempt to take shelter from the heavy rain and now the 
branch falls on him. This is an entirely likely scenario. In other words, 
the motor vehicle itself does not play an active role in the accident. It 
is not part of the proximate cause of the accident. For that reason, a 
claim under Section166 specifically may not be appropriate. 
14.	 In that view of the matter, the question of law is accordingly settled. 
15.	 A question however refuses to leave us. Will the respondent be 
forced to contend for compensation in another round of litigation? Is 
this conclusion in the interest of justice? Should we have to decide 
only the question of law then actual money reaching the hands of 
the respondent would be delayed. It appears to us, to be not so. A 
person who has suffered such life altering grievous injuries, being 
left in lurch, without any money to sustain himself, does not appeal 
to the conscience of justice. For ready reference the injuries as 
noticed by the High Court, is extracted hereunder:-
“The doctor has also stated that on clinical and radiological 
assessment, the following disabilities are found:
“1. Total paraplegia both lower limbs with bladder and 
bowel incontinence. 
2. ‘X’ ray of the spin shows fracture healing and implants 
position good.”
It is within our domain, as the final Court of the country to ensure 
the law, as implemented, specially in cases like these, is humane 
and in accordance with the salutary principles of the Constitution. 
That apart, we may observe that the compensation as determined by 
the High Court in itself, is insufficient as per the settled principles of 
law, owing to a somewhat technical approach adopted by the High 
Court. In that view of the matter, we enhance the total compensation 

112
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to Rs.25,00,000/- along with interest as determined by the High 
Court, to be calculated from the date of filing of the claim petition. 
The apportionment of liability shall remain undisturbed. This we do 
under the exercise of Article 142 of the Constitution.
16.	 The appeal is disposed of in terms of the above. The amount of 
compensation along with the interest shall be deposited into the 
bank account of the respondent directly. Learned counsel for the 
respondent shall furnish the bank details of the respondent to the 
learned counsel for the appellant. The amount shall be disbursed 
to the respondent within four weeks from the pronouncement of 
this judgment. The other parties who have been directed to pay the 
amount i.e., the Insurance Company and the Horticulture Department, 
Government of Karnataka, shall also do so within four weeks.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. No costs. 
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
