[2026] 7 S.C.R. 67 : 2026 INSC 626
Sahil Abdulsattar Mansuri & Ors. 
v.
Safimahamad Fafirbhai Mansuri & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 3058 of 2026)
04 June 2026
[Sanjay Karol* and Augustine George Masih, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to inordinate delay of nearly two decades in the 
investigation of the criminal complaint.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Arts.136, 226, 14 – Inordinate delay in 
the investigation of the criminal complaint – Complaint by 
the father of the appellants-original complainant, in the year 
2007, before the Judicial Magistrate against respondents 1 to 4 
u/ss.120B, 406, 420, 463, 468, 471, and 114 IPC alleging that 
while he was away on Haj pilgrimage, the accused persons 
forged his signatures and prepared bogus partition deed and 
fake sale deed, mutated their names in the Revenue Records – 
Applications by the original complainant seeking directions 
to the investigating officer to file chargesheet – Thereafter, 
writ petition praying for a direction to respondent no. 6 to file 
charge-sheet in their criminal complaint – High Court refused 
to issue any such direction – Correctness:
Held: High Court ought to have taken note of the inordinate delay 
of nearly two decades in filing of the chargesheet and intervened 
in the matter – However, matter of serious concern is that despite 
the lapse of such an inordinate period of time the investigation 
is yet to reach any meaningful conclusion – It is incumbent upon 
constitutional courts to not remain mute spectators, when such 
prolonged investigations are brought to its notice – Thus, in such 
peculiar circumstances, the High Court ought to have exercised 
its extraordinary jurisdiction to intervene – State submitted that 
detailed report, along with original case papers, during transit to 
the Magistrate, were misplaced and was never received by the 
Magistrate, and thereafter, re-investigation was ordered by the 
* Author

68
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
High Court – During re-investigation, original case papers remained 
untraceable – Disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the 
officer concerned and appropriate action was taken – Stand of the 
State is that in the absence of the original case records and inability 
to conclusively trace all relevant witnesses, the investigation could 
not be carried out to its logical conclusion – Upon consideration of 
the stand of the State, it is found that from the order of the High 
Court ordering re-investigation, nearly a decade has passed – Even 
in the case that during the investigation the police were not able 
to trace the relevant witnesses, ordinarily an appropriate report 
seeking closure should have been filed before the Magistrate – No 
reason, as to why the complaint and investigation have remained 
pending till date – Moreover, incidents wherein case records are 
lost during an active investigation, have to be taken with utmost 
seriousness – Such incidents strike at the very core of the criminal 
justice system, rendering bonafide complaints inactionable – Thus, 
in the interest of justice, the State of Gujarat and Police Station 
to conclude investigation within the stipulated period and file an 
appropriate report with the Magistrate containing all investigative 
material and if so, the lack thereof. [Paras10-18]
Case Law Cited
Robert Lalchungnunga Chongthu v. State of Bihar, 2025 SCC 
OnLine SC 2511 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Inordinate delay of two decades in the investigation of the criminal 
complaint; Haj pilgrimage; Forging of signatures; Preparation 
of bogus partition deed and fake sale deed; Directions to the 
investigating officer to file chargesheet.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
3058 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 26.06.2025 of the High Court 
of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in SCRA(D) No. 2029 of 2024

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
69
Sahil Abdulsattar Mansuri & Ors. v.  
Safimahamad Fafirbhai Mansuri & Ors.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Aastha Mehta, Satyam Chhayya, Ms. Prerana Mohapatra, 
Ms. Prina Sharma, Anshuman Srivastava.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Mehmood Umar Faruqui, Aman Rawat, Ms. Swati Ghildiyal, 
Ms. Neha Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
Sanjay Karol, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
Justice delayed is justice denied. While this proverb has been 
reiterated by Courts for time immemorial, the case at hand is an 
unfortunate occasion where despite repeatedly knocking the doors 
of the Courts below, there has been an inordinate delay of nearly 
two decades in the investigation of the criminal complaint, which 
compels interference by this Court. 
3.	
The present appeal arises from the impugned order dated 26.06.2025 
in Special Criminal Application (Direction) No. 2029 of 2024 passed 
by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad, whereby the writ petition 
preferred by the predecessor of the appellants praying for a direction 
to respondent no. 6 to file charge-sheet in their criminal complaint 
dated 14.09.2007, came to be dismissed.
Brief Facts
4.	
The father of the appellant(s)1 instituted a complaint before the 
Judicial Magistrate First Class, Bhiloda2 against respondent no. 1 to 4, 
under Sections 120B, 406, 420, 463,468, 471, and 114 of the Indian 
Penal Code, 18603. It was alleged therein that the subject property, 
being Survey No. 761, Bhiloda Village, was self-acquired by him 
1	
Hererinafter ‘original complainant’.
2	
Hereinafter ‘JMFC’.
3	
Hereinafter ‘IPC’.

70
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
on 11.12.1975. Subsequently, when he was on Haj pilgrimage from 
05.02.2002 to 21.03.2002, the aforesaid accused persons forged his 
signature and prepared a forged partition deed alongwith a bogus 
sale deed qua the subject property. On the basis of such forgery, 
their names were entered into the Revenue Records.
5.	
On 10.10.2014, the police presented C-Summary before the JMFC 
which came to be rejected, and further investigation was directed, to 
be concluded within 60 days. Thereafter, upon consideration of an 
application filed by the original complainant4 before the High Court of 
Gujarat at Ahmedabad5, on 20.07.2017, the Court directed preparation 
of the investigation report within six weeks while recording that some 
of the material collected during the investigation had gone missing 
from the custody of the concerned Police Station. 
6.	
Consequently, on 29.08.2017, the FSL Report was prepared and 
forwarded to JMFC on 27.11.2017. In this report, it was stated that 
the accused persons had prepared forged documents and forged 
signatures of the complainant. Pursuant thereto, on 27.11.2017, in 
Summary No.59 of 2017 the JMFC directed the police to take further 
action and carry out further investigation.
7.	
Thereafter, on 21.01.2018, an application was filed by the original 
complainant before the JMFC praying for appropriate orders to the 
investigating officer as neither the investigation was concluded nor 
a final report was submitted in the complaint. In the said application, 
the JMFC directed the investigating officer to specify within a period 
of 10 days as to whether investigation remains pending or has been 
concluded.
8.	
On 14.09.2022, the Addl. Judicial Magistrate Bhiloda, again directed 
the investigating officer to carry out investigation and file charge sheet 
in accordance with law. The original complainant was constrained to 
file another application6 before the High Court, praying for directions 
to the investigating officer to file chargesheet.
9.	
Vide the impugned order, the High Court refused to issue any such 
direction and disposed of the application. It was observed that no 
case is made out for issuance of direction under Article 226 of the 
4	
Special Criminal Application (Direction) No. 4455 of 2017.
5	
Hereinafter ‘High Court’.
6	
Special Criminal Application (Direction) No. 2029 of 2024.

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
71
Sahil Abdulsattar Mansuri & Ors. v.  
Safimahamad Fafirbhai Mansuri & Ors.
Constitution and since the JMFC had already passed an order to 
similar effect, an appropriate proceeding should have been initiated 
before the JMFC.
Our View
10.	 We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. At the outset, 
in the considered view of this Court, the High Court ought to have 
taken note of the inordinate delay in filing of the chargesheet and 
intervened in the matter at hand. 
11.	 The right to speedy trial is intrinsically linked to Article 21 of the 
Constitution. On this aspect, we advert to the observations of this 
Court in Robert Lalchungnunga Chongthu v. State of Bihar7:
“14. Various judgments of this Court have emphasised the 
right to speedy trial as being an important facet of Article 
21 of the Constitution. Timely completion of investigation 
is inherent thereto.
15. Moving further, it is to be noted that this aspect of 
prompt investigation has received statutory recognition as 
well in the CrPC, which of course, is the comprehensive 
code laying down detailed procedure is for stages of 
investigation, trial and appeal among other things. It must 
be stated that statutory recognition of prompt investigation 
is a pre-constitutional stipulation.
...
...
...
17. The inescapable conclusion arrived at from the above 
discussion in the Indian context, is that there has been 
an evolution in legislative wisdom over the years and 
the criminal procedure have moved from a period of no 
timelines and minimal judicial interventions/oversight to 
progressively more oversight and recognition of the need 
to conclude investigations in time. It may be true that no 
strict timelines are provided in the CrPC, but it is equally so 
that investigations are to be completed in reasonable time.
...
...
...
﻿7 
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2511.

72
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
21. Before parting with this matter, we deem it fit to issue 
the following directions:
...
...
...
ii) Reasons are indispensable to the proper functioning 
of the machinery of criminal law. They form the 
bedrock of fairness, transparency, and accountability 
in the justice system. If the Court finds or the 
accused alleges (obviously with proof and reason 
to substantiate the allegation) that there is a large 
gap between the first information report and the 
culminating chargesheet, it is bound to seek an 
explanation from the investigating agency and satisfy 
itself to the propriety of the explanation so furnished.
The direction above does not come based on 
this case alone. This Court has noticed on many 
unfortunate occasions that there is massive delay 
in filing chargesheet/taking cognizance etc. This 
Court has time and again, in its pronouncements 
underscored the necessity of speedy investigation 
and trial as being important for the accused, victim 
and the society. However, for a variety of reasons 
there is still a lag in the translation of this recognition 
into a reality.
(iii) While it is well acknowledged and recognised that 
the process of investigation has many moving parts 
and is therefore impractical to have strict timelines 
in place, at the same time, the discussion made in 
the earlier part of this judgement, clearly establishes 
that investigations cannot continue endlessly. The 
accused is not out of place to expect, after a certain 
point in time, certainty- about the charges against 
him, giving him ample time to preparing plead his 
defence. If investigation into a particular offence has 
continued for a period that appears to be unduly 
long, that too without adequate justification, such as 
in this case, the accused or the complainant both, 
shall be at liberty to approach the High Court under 
Section 528 BNSS/482 CrPC, seeking an update on 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
73
Sahil Abdulsattar Mansuri & Ors. v.  
Safimahamad Fafirbhai Mansuri & Ors.
the investigation or, if the doors of the High Court 
have been knocked by the accused, quashing. It is 
clarified that delay in completion of investigation will 
only function as one of the grounds, and the Court, 
if in its wisdom, decides to entertain this application, 
other grounds will also have to be considered.”
(emphasis supplied)
12.	 In the present factual matrix, nearly two decades have passed 
since the initiation of the complaint by the original complainant. 
However, it is a matter of serious concern that despite the lapse of 
such an inordinate period of time the investigation is yet to reach 
any meaningful conclusion. From a bare perusal of the record, it 
is evident that the original complainant had run from pillar to post, 
for filing of a chargesheet in connection with his complaint, but to 
no avail.
13.	 This Court is of the view that it is incumbent upon constitutional courts 
to not remain mute spectators, when such prolonged investigations 
are brought to its notice. Therefore, in such peculiar circumstances, 
the High Court ought to have exercised its extraordinary jurisdiction 
to intervene in the present matter.
14.	 At this stage, it becomes appropriate to consider the stand put forth by 
the State of Gujarat. It has been submitted that the materials seized 
during the course of investigation were sent for FSL examination, 
wherein it was opined that the original complainant had not authored 
the signatures on the forged documents. A detailed report, along with 
original case papers, was sent to the JMFC Court through Police 
Station Bhiloda, via Outward No. 564/15. However, during transit, 
the said material is stated to have been misplaced and was never 
received by the JMFC. Thereafter, re-investigation was ordered by 
the High Court of Gujarat vide order dated 20.07.2017. 
15.	 It has been submitted that during re-investigation, the original case 
papers remained untraceable. Disciplinary proceedings were initiated 
against the officer concerned and appropriate action was taken in 
accordance with law. The stand of the State is that in the absence 
of the original case records and inability to conclusively trace all 
relevant witnesses, the investigation could not be carried out to its 
logical conclusion. 

74
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
16.	 Upon consideration of the stand of the State, we find that from the 
order of the High Court ordering re-investigation, nearly a decade 
has passed. Even in the case that during the investigation the 
police were not able to trace the relevant witnesses, ordinarily an 
appropriate report seeking closure should have been filed before the 
JMFC. We find no reason from the record, as to why the complaint 
and investigation have remained pending till date. 
17.	 Moreover, we are of the view that incidents such as this, wherein 
case records are lost during an active investigation, have to be taken 
with utmost seriousness. Moreover, such incidents strike at the very 
core of the criminal justice system, rendering bonafide complaints 
inactionable. 
18.	 Therefore, in the interest of justice, we direct the State of Gujarat 
and Police Station Bhiloda, to conclude investigation within a period 
of six weeks from today and file an appropriate report with the 
JMFC containing all investigative material and if so, the lack thereof. 
Furthermore, the State of Gujarat to file an affidavit indicating:
a.	
Specific action taken against the officer involved, the stage of 
such action and whether taken to its logical conclusion;
b.	
Despite directions of the JMFC to conclude further investigation 
after the loss of records, why was the JMFC not informed of 
the inability to reconstruct records and track witnesses etc.; and
c.	
Compliance with direction to conclude investigation.
19.	 List on 14.07.2026 at 2.00 P.M. as part heard. 
Result of the case: Listed for further hearing.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
