[2026] 7 S.C.R. 49 : 2026 INSC 620
Sonal Talpada
v.
Veerbhan Singh
(Civil Appeal No. 8391 of 2026)
02 June 2026
[Sanjay Karol and Augustine George Masih,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Respondent-husband was subjected to ‘cruelty’ 
within the meaning of law and; whether the marital bond between 
the parties has ruptured to such an extent that the marriage has 
broken down irretrievably, rendering any reconciliation impossible 
and thus, deserves to be dissolved in exercise of powers u/Art.142 
of the Constitution of India.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.142 – Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 – 
ss.13(1)(ia), 13(1)(ib) – ‘cruelty’; ‘desertion’ – Dissolution of 
marriage in exercise of powers u/Art.142, on the ground of 
irretrievable breakdown – Family Court dismissed the divorce 
petition filed by the Respondent-husband holding that he 
failed to prove the cruelty committed by the Appellant-wife 
against him – Order set aside by High Court, granting divorce 
in favour of Respondent holding that cruelty was committed 
by the Appellant against the Respondent as she denied sexual 
relations on several occasions; desertion due to long absence 
from matrimonial home; and parties were living separately 
since 15 years – Correctness:
Held: Decree of divorce as granted by High Court is upheld – 
Denial of conjugal rights including persistent refusal of sexual 
intercourse without a reasonable cause constitutes mental cruelty 
and is a valid ground for divorce u/s.13(1)(ia) – Withholding sexual 
intimacy inflicts severe emotional distress and undermines the 
bedrock of marriage – Appellant has not denied the fact that 
they used to sleep in different rooms – Thus, the acceptance of 
the ground of cruelty for grant of divorce is correct – Moreover, 
even during the short period of cohabitation parties failed to 
perform their conjugal responsibilities – They have strongly held 
* Author

50
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
views with regard to the approach towards matrimonial life and 
refused to accommodate each other for a long period of time – 
In situations where parties have been living separately for a 
considerable time without any hope for reconciliation amounts 
to cruelty to both the parties – Parties had a prolonged physical 
separation spanning more than a decade and a half – Although 
the Appellant contended that she had left her job in Gujarat and 
started residing in Bharatpur, Rajasthan in their matrimonial home 
but there is no evidence to substantiate the same – Rather the 
evidence is to the contrary and it is not disputed that she still 
continues with her job in Gujarat – Further, while the statutory 
ground of ‘desertion’ u/s.13(1)(ib) was not formally pleaded 
by the Respondent however, the element of desertion can be 
viewed neutrally through an objective lens where spouses choose 
independent professional and geographical paths and remain 
completely estranged without any reciprocal effort to bridge 
the distance – In such circumstances, desertion ceases to be 
merely a matter of individual malice or unilateral fault rather it 
assumes the character of a shared, de facto abandonment of 
the matrimonial covenant – Parties have objectively deserted 
the matrimonial framework itself – The intentional maintenance 
of distinct lifestyles, separate domiciles, and the total cessation 
of marital interaction over fifteen years establishes a de facto 
abandonment of the marital covenant by both sides – Marriage 
between the Appellant and the Respondent has broken down 
irretrievably and is dissolved in exercise of powers u/Art.142 of 
the Constitution of India. [Paras 18, 19, 22, 24, 27, 28, 30, 34]
Constitution of India – Art.142 – Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 – 
Exercise of inherent powers u/Art.142, for dissolution of a 
marriage on the ground of its irretrievable breakdown, though 
the facts of the case do not provide a ground in law on which 
the divorce could be granted – It is in the best interest of 
parties and the society if ties are severed between parties in 
cases where litigation has been pending for a considerably 
long period of time:
Held: This Court has exercised its inherent powers u/Art.142 for 
dissolution of a marriage where it finds that the marriage is totally 
unworkable, emotionally dead, beyond salvage and has broken 
down irretrievably, even if the facts of the case do not provide 
a ground in law on which the divorce could be granted – In the 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
51
Sonal Talpada v. Veerbhan Singh
present case, admittedly, the Appellant-wife and the Respondent-
husband have been living separately for more than 15 years, all 
efforts to reconcile them have failed and therefore, it will not be 
possible for the parties to live together – Therefore, this is a fit 
case to exercise the powers u/Art.142 and to dissolve the marriage 
between the parties – Though, the approach of the Courts should 
be to preserve the sanctity of marriage and the Court should be 
reluctant to dissolve the marriage at the mere asking of one of the 
parties but, in the present case, the parties have lived separately 
for far too long a period of time and there is no sanctity left in the 
marriage – Although, the Appellant contended that she had left 
her job in Gujarat and started residing in Bharatpur, Rajasthan in 
their matrimonial home but there is no evidence to substantiate 
the same – Rather the evidence on record is to the contrary and 
it is not disputed that she still continues with her job in Gujarat – 
There appears to be no intention on her part to join company of 
the husband – Grant of divorce in the present proceedings would 
not have a devastating effect on any third party, as there are 
no children from the wedlock – Moreover, prolonged pendency 
of matrimonial litigation only leads to perpetuity of marriage on 
paper – It is in the best interest of parties and the society if ties 
are severed between parties in cases where litigation has been 
pending for a considerably long period of time. [Paras 34-36, 38]
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 – Mental cruelty, allegations of – 
Withdrawal from the foundational aspects of marriage have legal 
consequences while evaluating allegations of mental cruelty:
Held: Marriage, in its legal and constitutional dimension, can 
never be reduced to a mere contractual intersection of individual 
rights, nor can it be viewed strictly through the narrow lens of a 
petition for conjugal rights – It is a deeply personal and social 
partnership built on mutual respect, shared expectations and 
equal responsibility – When two parties enter into matrimony, they 
weave a tapestry of interdependence that demands a continuous 
balancing of interests – Conjugal rights do not exist in a vacuum; 
they are the structural counterparts to conjugal duties – To demand 
the fulfilment of the former while wilfully abandoning the sanctity 
of the latter is to undermine the very essence of the institution – 
Therefore, matrimony is not a one-sided right to be enforced, but 
a shared covenant of emotional support, fidelity, responsibility and 
care, where the rights of one are always tied to the duties they 

52
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
owe to the other – Persistent withdrawal from the foundational 
aspects of marriage may have legal consequences while evaluating 
allegations of mental cruelty. [Para 22]
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 – ss.13(1)(ia), 13(1)(ib) – ‘cruelty’; 
‘desertion’ – Appellate Court entitled to consider the conduct 
of the parties during the pendency of litigation – Family 
Court dismissed the divorce petition filed by the Respondent-
husband holding that he failed to prove the cruelty committed 
by the Appellant-wife against him – High Court allowed the 
appeal filed by the Respondent, granting divorce in his favour 
holding that cruelty was committed by the Appellant against 
the Respondent as she denied sexual relations on several 
occasions; desertion due to long absence from matrimonial 
home; and parties were living separately since 15 years:
Held: High Court rightly assessed that where parties have been 
living separately for several years and at this stage asking them 
to live together after a prolonged duration would amount to cruelty 
to both the parties and divorce can be granted on this ground as 
provided u/s.13 (1)(ia) – Further, though, desertion as a ground 
requires an initial period as mentioned under the statute but if 
such desertion continues for a long period of time without any 
effort on the part of the parties to restore cohabitation would itself 
be a ground to be considered by the Appellate Court – Human 
relations are dynamic and once the initial mandate under the 
statute stands satisfied, continuation thereof during the litigation 
would aggravate the said agony which could be confirmational in 
substantiating the basis and pleaded ground for divorce – The 
same can be taken into consideration for formation of an opinion 
to accept the prayer by the Appellate Court – Appeal is the 
continuation of a suit and therefore, the Appellate Court would be 
entitled and justified to consider the conduct of the parties during 
the pendency of litigation – The same can also be looked into to 
support or reject an opinion on the ground in question – An Appellate 
Court, while carefully ensuring that a party does not profit from 
their own manifest wrong or unilateral desertion, may legitimately 
treat a prolonged period of separation as an indicator of mental 
cruelty within the meaning of s.13(1)(ia) – Appellate Court is not 
precluded from examining whether continuous separation over a 
substantial period, coupled with absence of any genuine effort at 
reconciliation, complete cessation of cohabitation and emotional 
alienation has resulted in mental cruelty – Subsequent events 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
53
Sonal Talpada v. Veerbhan Singh
occurring during pendency of proceedings may legitimately be 
taken into consideration while undertaking such assessment – In 
such circumstances, the confirmation of a decree of divorce by an 
Appellate Court is not an invocation of extraordinary constitutional 
jurisdiction u/Art.142, but a lawful and realistic application of the 
statutory ground of cruelty to the facts of the case. [Paras 25, 26]
Case Law Cited
Samar Ghosh v. Jaya Ghosh [2007] 4 SCR 428 : (2007) 4 SCC 
511; Vikas Kanaujia v. Sarita [2024] 7 SCR 933 : (2025) 3 SCC 
748; Amutha v. A.R. Subramanian 2024 INSC 1033 : [2024] 12 
SCR 755 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3822; Shilpa Sailesh v. Varun 
Sreenivasan [2023] 5 SCR 165 : (2023) 14 SCC 231; Nayan 
Bhowmick v. Aparna Chakraborty, 2025 INSC 1436 : 2025 SCC 
OnLine SC 2798; R. Srinivas Kumar v. R. Shametha [2019] 12 
SCR 873 : (2019) 9 SCC 409 – relied on.
Darshan Gupta v. Radhika Gupta [2013] 10 SCR 937 : (2013) 9 
SCC 1; Vishnu Dutt Sharma v. Manju Sharma [2009] 3 SCR 891 : 
(2009) 6 SCC 379; Naveen Kohli v. Neelu Kohli [2006] 3 SCR 
53 : (2006) 4 SCC 558; Savitri Pandey v. Prem Chandra Pandey  
[2002] 1 SCR 50 : (2002) 2 SCC 73 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
List of Keywords
Irretrievable breakdown of marriage; Marriage dissolved in exercise 
of powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India; Section 
13(1) (ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955; Section 13(1)  (ib) 
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955; ‘mental cruelty’; ‘desertion’; 
Ground of ‘desertion’ not formally pleaded;  Desertion for a long 
period of time; Prolonged physical separation; Long absence from 
matrimonial home; Denial of conjugal rights; Persistent refusal of 
sexual intercourse; Sexual intimacy withheld; Severe emotional 
distress; Decree of divorce upheld; Denial of conjugal rights; Short 
period of cohabitation; Failure to perform conjugal responsibilities; 
Marriage totally unworkable; Marriage emotionally dead; Marriage 
beyond salvage; Approach towards matrimonial life; Refusal to 
accommodate; Parties living separately for a considerable time; 
No hope for reconciliation;  Parties living separately for more than 

54
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
15 years; All efforts to reconcile failed; All efforts of reconciliation 
failed; Not possible for the parties to live together; Distinct lifestyles; 
Separate domiciles; Total cessation of marital interaction; de facto 
abandonment of marital covenant.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 8391 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.01.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur in DBCM No. 5127 of 2019
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Neeraj Shekhar, Mrs. Kshama Sharma, Ram Bacchan Choudhary.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Mithilesh Jha, Ms. Rishika Chahar, Tarun Chauhan.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Augustine George Masih, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The instant Appeal assails the judgment and order dated 02.01.2025 
(hereinafter referred to as “Impugned Judgment”) passed by the 
High Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur (hereinafter referred to as “High 
Court”), whereby the D.B. Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No. 5127 of 
2019 filed by the Respondent-husband (Divorce Petitioner) herein 
stands allowed by setting aside the judgment and decree dated 
21.08.2019 passed by the Family Court at Bharatpur, Rajasthan 
(hereinafter referred to as “Family Court”), vide which petition seeking 
divorce from the Appellant-wife filed by the Respondent-husband 
was dismissed.
3.	
Brief facts are that the marriage of the Appellant-wife and the 
Respondent-husband took place on 05.12.2007 as per the Hindu 
rites in Nadiyad Khera, Gujarat. No child was born out of their 
wedlock. At the time of marriage, Appellant-wife was working 
as a Gynaecologist in a government hospital in Nadiyad Khera, 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
55
Sonal Talpada v. Veerbhan Singh
Gujarat and Respondent-husband, also a doctor, in State service 
in Rajasthan.
4.	
It appears that there were sociocultural differences between the parties 
and according to the Respondent-husband, cruelty was meted out 
to him. Appellant-wife lived with him for hardly two to three months 
in their matrimonial home at Bharatpur, Rajasthan during their 
matrimonial period of two years. Leading to the Respondent-husband 
filing a divorce petition in the year 2009 before the Family Court. The 
said petition was filed under Section 13(1) (ia) of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as “HMA”). The Family Court on 
21.08.2018 dismissed the said divorce petition holding therein that 
the Respondent-husband has failed to prove the cruelty committed 
by the Appellant-wife against him.
5.	
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and order 
passed by the Family Court dismissing the divorce petition, the 
Respondent-husband preferred an appeal before the High Court. 
By the impugned judgment and order, the High Court allowed the 
said appeal. Hence, the Appellant-wife is before this Court by way 
of the present appeal.
6.	
The learned counsel appearing for the Appellant-wife submits that 
she has never abandoned the Respondent-husband and was always 
ready and willing to lead a matrimonial life with him. Respondent-
husband cannot be allowed to take advantage of his own wrong. 
It was further contended that Respondent-husband did not allow 
Appellant-wife to perform her conjugal duties.
7.	
The learned counsel further submits that the grounds for desertion 
and irretrievable breakdown of marriage were not pleaded in the 
Divorce Petition. In fact, it was Respondent-husband who deserted 
the Appellant-wife. Appellant-wife had left her government service in 
Gujarat and started living in Bharatpur to save her matrimonial life. 
Father of the Respondent-husband had allowed the Appellant-wife to 
work in Gujarat till construction of Nursing home in Bharatpur. However, 
construction of said nursing home never commenced and therefore, 
Appellant-wife continued working in Gujarat. Respondent-husband 
has failed to produce any evidence to establish that Appellant-wife 
has committed any cruelty against him. Therefore, present appeal be 
allowed and decree of Divorce granted by the High Court vide the 
impugned judgment in favour of Respondent-husband be set aside.

56
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
8.	
Learned counsel for Appellant-wife has heavily relied upon decisions 
of this Court in Darshan Gupta v. Radhika Gupta1, Vishnu Dutt 
Sharma v. Manju Sharma2 and Samar Ghosh v. Jaya Ghosh3.
9.	
The present appeal is vehemently opposed by the learned counsel 
of the Respondent­ husband. The learned counsel submits that the 
Appellant-wife has never made any efforts to save her matrimonial 
life. The parties are living separately for more than 15 years and 
have co-habited for merely 2-3 months in the span of 18 years. 
The Appellant-wife has denied establishment of sexual relations to 
Respondent-husband on several occasions. Therefore, the Appellant-
wife has committed cruelty and has deserted the Respondent-
husband.
10.	 Learned counsel for the Respondent-husband further submits that 
the Appellant-wife has failed to build any mutual trust, companionship 
and shared experiences with the Respondent-husband which led to 
irretrievable breakdown of marriage. The parties have different lifestyle 
and personal preferences. To overcome such differences is beyond 
the control of both the parties. There is no chance of reconciliation. 
Parties were engaged in matrimonial litigation from last many years. 
It is denied that Appellant-wife has left her job in Gujarat. He asserts 
that it is a fit case to dissolve the marriage between the Appellant-
wife and the Respondent-husband on the ground of irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage. Therefore, the present appeal deserves to 
be dismissed.
11.	 The learned counsel for the Respondent-husband has relied upon 
decisions of this Court in Naveen Kohli v. Neelu Kohli4, Vikas 
Kanaujia v. Sarita5, Amutha v. A.R. Subramanian6, Shilpa 
Sailesh  v. Varun Sreenivasan7 and Savitri Pandey v. Prem 
Chandra Pandey8.
1	
(2013) 9 SCC 1
2	
(2009) 6 SCC 379
3	
(2007) 4 SCC 511
4	
(2006) 4 SCC 558
5	
(2025) 3 SCC 748
6	
2024 INSC 1033 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3822
7	
(2023) 14 SCC 231
8	
(2002) 2 SCC 73

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
57
Sonal Talpada v. Veerbhan Singh
12.	 We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at 
length and with their assistance have gone through the relevant 
pleadings and evidence lead by the parties before the Courts below. 
It is pertinent to mention, that the Appellant-wife has, right from the 
stage of trial till this Court, rigidly maintained her stand that she 
does not want to dissolve the marriage and wants to continue her 
matrimonial life with the Respondent-husband. No other civil or 
criminal proceedings were instituted by either party against each 
other.
13.	 The parties have been living separately for about fifteen (15) years 
and there is no child from the wedlock. Despite repeated efforts by 
Courts, there has been no reconciliation between the parties. At the 
stage of admission of appeal, this Court had referred the parties 
to mediation vide order dated 23.05.2025. However, mediation 
was unsuccessful which is evident from the Mediation report dated 
27.11.2025. No efforts have been made since then, by either of the 
parties, to reconcile their matrimonial differences.
14.	 At the outset, it is required to be noted that the High Court granted the 
divorce in favour of Respondent-husband on the following grounds:
a)	
Appellant-wife had insulted the Respondent-husband before a 
shopkeeper while on their visit to Taj Mahal;
b)	
Cruelty was committed by the Appellant-wife against the 
Respondent-husband as she denied sexual relations on several 
occasions;
c)	
Desertion due to long absence from matrimonial home; and
d)	
Parties were living separately since 15 years.
15.	 Adverting to findings recorded by the High Court, this Court is 
called to adjudicate upon whether the Respondent-husband was 
subjected to ‘cruelty’ within the meaning of law, and whether the 
marital bond between the parties has ruptured to such an extent 
that the marriage has broken down irretrievably, rendering any 
reconciliation impossible.
16.	 Though with respect to ‘cruelty’ no uniform standard can ever be laid 
down for guidance, yet this Court in Samar Ghosh (supra) deemed 
it appropriate to enumerate some instances of human behaviour 
which may be relevant in dealing with the cases of ‘mental cruelty’:

58
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“Para 101........(xii) Unilateral decision of refusal to have 
intercourse for considerable period without there being 
any physical incapacity or valid reason may amount to 
mental cruelty. (xiii) Unilateral decision of either husband 
or wife after marriage not to have child from the marriage 
may amount to cruelty. (xiv) Where there has been a long 
period of continuous separation, it may fairly be concluded 
that the matrimonial bond is beyond repair. The marriage 
becomes a fiction though supported by a legal tie. By 
refusing to sever that tie, the law in such cases, does not 
serve the sanctity of marriage; on the contrary, it shows 
scant regard for the feelings and emotions of the parties. 
In such like situations, it may lead to mental cruelty.”
(emphasis supplied)
17.	 Reverting to facts of the present case, with regards to contention 
that the Appellant-wife had insulted the Respondent-husband before 
the shopkeeper, the Family Court has correctly assessed that the 
Respondent-husband himself admitted that Taj Mahal was closed 
on that day so, there was no requirement of hiring a drunk guide. 
There is nothing wrong in wife asking for a Teddy bear.
18.	 However, on the question of cruelty from the evidence of the 
Respondent-husband it also, comes out that even during that short 
period of cohabitation the Appellate-wife used to sleep early in night, 
lock her room from inside and never open the door on knocking. 
The Respondent-husband used to sleep in other separate room. 
The Appellant-wife has not denied the fact that they used to sleep 
in different rooms. The acceptance of the ground of cruelty for grant 
of divorce is, thus, correct.
19.	 As held in the case of Samar Ghosh (supra) and other catena of 
judgments by this Court, denial of conjugal rights including persistent 
refusal of sexual intercourse without a reasonable cause constitutes 
mental cruelty and is a valid ground for divorce under Section 13(1)
(ia) of the HMA. The courts in India have repeatedly established that 
withholding sexual intimacy inflicts severe emotional distress and 
undermines the bedrock of marriage. Therefore, the conclusion of 
the High Court is sustained. The decree of divorce as granted by 
allowing the appeal of the Respondent-husband is upheld.

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
59
Sonal Talpada v. Veerbhan Singh
20.	 As regarding the ground of desertion, the Family Court has pointed 
out that the father of Respondent-husband had admitted during his 
cross-examination that he had asked father of Appellant-wife that she 
can continue to work in Nadiyad Khera, Gujarat till a nursing home 
was constructed in Bharatpur, Rajasthan. Merely because father-in-
law had said so would not in itself means a licence for not joining 
and fulfilling the matrimonial obligations which arise upon the parties 
having entered into the relationship of husband and wife. Seeing 
when the things were not moving with regards to the construction 
of the nursing home, steps need to have been taken by the parties 
to cohabitate. Nothing has come on record indicating any effort on 
the part of the Appellant-wife or even the Respondent-husband in 
this direction.
21.	 While the statutory ground of desertion may not have been pleaded 
but matrimonial disputes are seldom confined to isolated legal 
labels. The Court is also required to examine the overall conduct 
of the parties and the manner in which they have discharged their 
matrimonial obligations. It is from this broader perspective issue of 
cruelty deserves further consideration.
22.	 Marriage, in its legal and constitutional dimension, can never be 
reduced to a mere contractual intersection of individual rights, nor 
can it be viewed strictly through the narrow lens of a petition for 
conjugal rights. It is a deeply personal and social partnership built 
on mutual respect, shared expectations and equal responsibility. 
When two parties enter into matrimony, they weave a tapestry of 
interdependence that demands a continuous balancing of interests. 
Conjugal rights do not exist in a vacuum; they are the structural 
counterparts to conjugal duties. To demand the fulfilment of the former 
while wilfully abandoning the sanctity of the latter is to undermine the 
very essence of the institution. Matrimony, therefore, is not a one-sided 
right to be enforced, but a shared covenant of emotional support, 
fidelity, responsibility and care, where the rights of one are always 
tied to the duties they owe to the other. Persistent withdrawal from 
the foundational aspects of marriage may have legal consequences 
while evaluating allegations of mental cruelty.
23.	 From the conduct of parties, it is clear that even during the short period 
of cohabitation they failed to perform their conjugal responsibilities. 
The parties have strongly held views with regard to the approach 

60
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
towards matrimonial life and they have refused to accommodate 
each other for a long period of time. As held in the case of Nayan 
Bhowmick v. Aparna Chakraborty9, this Court is of the view that in 
matrimonial matters involving two individuals, it is not for the society 
or for the Court to sit in judgment over which spouse’s approach 
is correct or not. It is their strongly held views and their refusal to 
accommodate each other that amounts to cruelty to one another.
24.	 This Court in multitude of cases, has held that in situations where 
parties have been living separately for a considerable time without 
any hope for reconciliation amounts to cruelty to both the parties.
25.	 In the light of the above, it can be said that the High Court has 
rightly assessed that where parties have been living separately for 
several years and at this stage asking them to live together after a 
prolonged duration would amount to cruelty to both the parties and 
divorce can be granted on this ground as provided under section 
13 (1)(ia) of HMA. It may be added here that desertion as a ground 
requires an initial period as mentioned under the statute but if such 
desertion continues for a long period of time without any effort on the 
part of the parties to restore cohabitation would itself be a ground 
to be considered by the Appellate Court. This we say in the light 
of the fact that human relations are dynamic and once the initial 
mandate under the statute stands satisfied, continuation thereof 
during the litigation would aggravate the said agony which could be 
confirmational in substantiating the basis and pleaded ground for 
divorce. The same can be taken into consideration for formation of 
an opinion to accept the prayer by the Appellate Court. Appeal is the 
continuation of a suit and therefore, the Appellate Court would be 
entitled and justified to consider the conduct of the parties during the 
pendency of litigation. The same can also be looked into to support 
or reject an opinion on the ground in question.
26.	 An Appellate Court, while carefully ensuring that a party does not 
profit from their own manifest wrong or unilateral desertion, may 
legitimately treat a prolonged period of separation as an indicator of 
mental cruelty within the meaning of Section 13(1)(ia) of the HMA. The 
Appellate Court is not precluded from examining whether continuous 
separation over a substantial period, coupled with absence of any 
9	
2025 INSC 1436 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2798

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
61
Sonal Talpada v. Veerbhan Singh
genuine effort at reconciliation, complete cessation of cohabitation 
and emotional alienation has resulted in mental cruelty. Subsequent 
events occurring during pendency of proceedings may legitimately 
be taken into consideration while undertaking such assessment. In 
such circumstances, the confirmation of a decree of divorce by an 
Appellate Court is not an invocation of extraordinary constitutional 
jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India, but a lawful 
and realistic application of the statutory ground of cruelty to the facts 
of the case.
27.	 A significant aspect of this case is the prolonged physical separation 
spanning more than a decade and a half. While the statutory ground 
of ‘desertion’ under Section 13(1)(ib) of the HMA has not been 
formally pleaded by the Respondent-husband however, the element 
of desertion can be viewed neutrally through an objective lens where 
spouses choose independent professional and geographical paths 
and remain completely estranged without any reciprocal effort to 
bridge the distance.
28.	 In such circumstances, desertion ceases to be merely a matter of 
individual malice or unilateral fault rather it assumes the character 
of a shared, de facto abandonment of the matrimonial covenant. 
The parties have objectively deserted the matrimonial framework 
itself. The intentional maintenance of distinct lifestyles, separate 
domiciles, and the total cessation of marital interaction over fifteen 
years establishes a de facto abandonment of the marital covenant 
by both sides.
29.	 In any event, this Court in exercise of power to do “complete justice” 
under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India has the discretion 
to dissolve the marriage on the ground of irretrievable breakdown.
30.	 In present case, it is not disputed that since more than last 15 years 
both the Appellant-wife and the Respondent-husband are residing 
separately. It also appears that all efforts to continue the marriage 
have failed and there is no possibility of re-union because of the 
strained relations between the parties. Thus, it is apparent that 
marriage between the Appellant-wife and the Respondent-husband 
has also, broken down irretrievably.
31.	 In the case of Vikas Kanaujia (supra), where the husband and wife 
lived together for total 43 days and period for separation was more 
than 22 years, this Court held that:

62
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“17. The husband and wife have lived together on their own 
will for hardly 23 days since marriage. They further lived 
together for 20 more days from 15.06.2005 to 05.07.2015 
as Sessions Court passed order for conciliation. Thus, in 
total the parties have not lived together for more than 43 
days. The Respondent left her matrimonial house within 
the first month of marriage. The period of separation has 
been more than 22 years. The possibility of parties living 
together is further reduced as parties are in their early 
50s now and have built independent lives. Further, the 
parties have fought multiple legal battles against each 
other since 2002 itself with six cases filed against each 
other, including criminal cases. The Respondent had 
filed a criminal case against the Appellant and his family 
members where they were arrested although subsequently 
discharged and acquitted. 
18. Although the respondent claims that she is willing to 
live with the Appellant believing in the sanctity of marriage, 
her actions are not in consonance with her claim. In this 
long period of 22 years, there was no one to stop her 
from living together with the Appellant. The mediation 
and conciliation proceedings have failed. The Appellant 
on the other hand states that the claim of willingness to 
live together is falsely projected claim before the Court of 
law only to mislead the Court, delay the proceedings and 
harass the appellant.
19. Thus, the effective cumulation of actions of both the 
parties in past 22 years since marriage has resulted in 
demolition of their matrimonial bond beyond repair. The 
marriage has ceased to exist both in substance and in 
reality. The relation has even taken a sour taste as the 
families of parties have also developed rivalries. The act of 
Respondent to lodge a missing complaint against Appellant 
after the delivery of impugned order is also indicative of 
the bitter relation between the parties. Considering the long 
separation period of 22 years, lack of existence of marriage 
between the parties and the sour relations developed 
due to continuous legal battles, we deem this case to be 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
63
Sonal Talpada v. Veerbhan Singh
fit for exercise of extraordinary powers conferred under 
Article 142 of the Constitution.
20. In Rajib Kumar Roy vs Sushmita Saha, this Court 
exercised the power conferred under Article 142 of the 
Constitution of India by dissolving the marriage between 
parties who were living separately for 12 years. Paragraph 
Nos. 8, 9 and 10 of the judgement are reproduced 
hereunder: 
‘8. Continued bitterness, dead emotions and long 
separation, in the given facts and circumstances of 
a case, can be construed as a case of ‘irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage’, which is also a facet of 
‘cruelty’. In Rakesh Raman v. Kavita, 2023 SCC 
OnLine SC 497, this is precisely what was held, that 
though in a given case cruelty as a fault, may not 
be attributable to one party alone and hence despite 
irretrievable breakdown of marriage keeping the 
parties together amounts to cruelty on both sides. 
Which is precisely the case at hand.
9. Whatever may be the justification for the two living 
separately, with so much of time gone by, any marital 
love or affection, which may have been between the 
parties, seems to have dried up. This is a classic case 
of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. In view of the 
Constitution Bench Judgment of this court in Shilpa 
Sailesh v. Varun Sreenivasan, 2023 SCC OnLine 
SC 544 which has held that in such cases where 
there is irretrievable breakdown of marriage then 
dissolution of marriage is the only solution and this 
Court can grant a decree of divorce in exercise of its 
power under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
10. We therefore declare the marriage to have broken 
down irretrievably and therefore in exercise of our 
jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of 
India we are of the considered opinion that this being 
a case of irretrievable breakdown of marriage must 
now be dissolved by grant of decree of divorce.’ ” 
(emphasis supplied)

64
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
32.	 In the case of Shilpa Shailesh (supra), while considering the cases 
of Darshan Gupta (supra) and Vishnu Dutt Sharma (supra) as 
relied upon by the Appellant-wife, the Constitution Bench clarified 
that this Court, in exercise of power under Article 142(1) of the 
Constitution of India, has the discretion to dissolve the marriage on 
the ground of its irretrievable breakdown. This discretionary power 
is to be exercised to do ‘complete justice’ to the parties, wherein this 
Court is satisfied that the facts established show that the marriage 
has completely failed and there is no possibility that the parties will 
cohabit together, and continuation of the formal legal relationship is 
unjustified. The Court, as a court of equity, is required to also balance 
the circumstances and the background in which the party opposing 
the dissolution is placed. Further, it was held that:
“62. Having said so, we wish to clearly state that grant 
of divorce on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage by this Court is not a matter of right, but a 
discretion which is to be exercised with great care and 
caution, keeping in mind several factors ensuring that 
“complete justice” is done to both parties. It is obvious 
that this Court should be fully convinced and satisfied that 
the marriage is totally unworkable, emotionally dead and 
beyond salvation and, therefore, dissolution of marriage 
is the right solution and the only way forward. 
63. That the marriage has irretrievably broken down is to 
be factually determined and firmly established. For this, 
several factors are to be considered such as the period 
of time the parties had cohabited after marriage; when 
the parties had last cohabited; the nature of allegations 
made by the parties against each other and their family 
members; the orders passed in the legal proceedings 
from time to time, cumulative impact on the personal 
relationship; whether, and how many attempts were made 
to settle the disputes by intervention of the court or through 
mediation, and when the last attempt was made, etc. 
The period of separation should be sufficiently long, and 
anything above six years or more will be a relevant factor. 
But these facts have to be evaluated keeping in view the 
economic and social status of the parties, including their 
educational qualifications, whether the parties have any 
children, their age, educational qualification, and whether 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
65
Sonal Talpada v. Veerbhan Singh
the other spouse and children are dependent, in which 
event how and in what manner the party seeking divorce 
intends to take care and provide for the spouse or the 
children. Question of custody and welfare of minor children, 
provision for fair and adequate alimony for the wife, and 
economic rights of the children and other pending matters, 
if any, are relevant considerations. We would not like to 
codify the factors so as to curtail exercise of jurisdiction 
under Article 142(1) of the Constitution of India, which is 
situation specific. Some of the factors mentioned can be 
taken as illustrative, and worthy of consideration.”
(emphasis supplied)
33.	 In the similar set of facts and circumstances of the case, this Court 
in the case of R. Srinivas Kumar v. R. Shametha10 had directed to 
dissolve the marriage on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of 
marriage as parties were living separately for more than 22 years, 
in exercise of powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
34.	 This Court, in a series of judgments, has exercised its inherent 
powers under Article 142 of the Constitution of India for dissolution 
of a marriage where the Court finds that the marriage is totally 
unworkable, emotionally dead, beyond salvage and has broken down 
irretrievably, even if the facts of the case do not provide a ground 
in law on which the divorce could be granted. In the present case, 
admittedly, the Appellant-wife and the Respondent-husband have 
been living separately for more than 15 years, all efforts to reconcile 
them have failed and therefore, it will not be possible for the parties to 
live together. Therefore, we are of the considered opinion that this is 
a fit case to exercise the powers under Article 142 of the Constitution 
of India and to dissolve the marriage between the parties.
35.	 This Court is conscious of the view that approach of the Courts 
should be to preserve the sanctity of marriage and the Court should 
be reluctant to dissolve the marriage at the mere asking of one of the 
parties. But, in the present case, the parties have lived separately 
for far too long a period of time and there is no sanctity left in the 
marriage. Although plea had been taken that the Appellant-wife had 
left her job in Gujarat and started residing in Bharatpur, Rajasthan but 
﻿10 
(2019) 9 SCC 409

66
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
no evidence has come on record to substantiate the same. Rather 
the evidence on record is to the contrary and it is not disputed that 
she still continues with her job in Gujarat. There appears to be no 
intention on her part to join company of the husband as actions speak 
more than the dry words. Grant of divorce in the present proceedings 
would not have a devastating effect on any third party, as there are 
no children from the wedlock. Both the wife and husband are doctors 
and are in government service in State of Gujarat and Rajasthan 
respectively, therefore, financially well off and independent.
36.	 This Court is also of the view that prolonged pendency of matrimonial 
litigation only leads to perpetuity of marriage on paper. It is in the 
best interest of parties and the society if ties are severed between 
parties in cases where litigation has been pending for a considerably 
long period of time. Prolongation of a matrimonial relationship would 
further lead not only to escalation of frustration in a dead relationship, 
which has already decayed and is decomposing day by day creating 
foul sociological, psychological and mental hollowness in life resulting 
in denial of a free and independent environment to flourish which 
each human strives in body and soul. Consequently, this Court is of 
the opinion that such matrimonial litigation pending in Court needs 
to be put to end by granting effective release to the parties from a 
stale and frozen relationship.
37.	 In the light of what has been stated above, in our considered view, 
this would be a fit case where the relationship of marriage should 
come to an end for which exercise of powers under Article 142 of 
the Constitution of India would be essential to do complete justice. 
Accordingly, the marriage between the Appellant-wife and the 
Respondent-husband deserves to be dissolved in exercise of powers 
under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
38.	 As a consequence of the above, the present appeal stands dismissed.
39.	 There shall be no order as to cost.
40.	 Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
