[2026] 7 S.C.R. 240 : 2026 INSC 636
Makardhwaj Ram
v.
Jagdish Rai (Dead) Th. Lrs. & Anr.
(Civil Appeal No. 2950 of 2011)
11 June 2026
[Sanjay Karol* and 
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the earlier proceedings provided opportunity enough for 
the plaintiff by being substantially similar, to raise the point of his 
ownership of the suit properties by virtue of the 1960 sale deed 
when the main ground urged otherwise was cancellation of sale 
deed; whether the High Court in terms of the impugned judgment 
erred in dismissing the suit as being barred by constructive res 
judicata.
Headnotes†
Code of Civil Procedure 1908 – s.11 – Principle of constructive 
res judicata – Inapplicability, when – A portion of the property 
totalling to 95.80 acres was transferred to the appellant, by his 
father ‘MR’ – ‘MR’, his wife, and mother executed a General 
Power of Attorney in favour of ‘R’-‘MR’s cousin who using 
the said GPA sold certain portions of land – However, the 
said GPA was subsequently cancelled – Aforesaid transfers 
challenged by ‘MR’ and his wife, dismissed – ‘R’ sought 
mutation of his name in the Revenue Records, dismissed 
at first instance but was allowed on appeal – Appellant filed 
suit for declaration of title and possession against ‘R’ – Suit 
was partly decreed, holding the appellant entitled to 43.69 
acres as against the claim of 95.8 acres – Appeal filed by 
successor-in-interest of ‘R’, dismissed – Further appeal 
filed, High Court dismissed the suit as being barred by 
constructive res judicata holding that that in both the earlier 
suits the appellant could have claimed the right over subject 
land to be flowing from the 1960 deed executed in his favour 
* Author

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
241
Makardhwaj Ram v. Jagdish Rai (Dead) Th. Lrs. & Anr.
by ‘MR’ but since, he did not do that and instead chose to 
pursue an inferior claim of cancellation of sale deed, the 
stronger one stood given up by application of constructive 
res judicata – Interference with:
Held: Constructive res judicata mandates that all grounds that 
might and ought to have been employed in the proceedings, 
should be employed to avoid multiplicity of proceedings – It is 
a deeming fiction of law, but its application is not uniform and 
instead is dependent on the facts and circumstances of a particular 
case with ‘due regard to ambit of the earlier proceedings’ and ‘the 
nexus which the matter bears to the nature of the controversy’ – 
The issue of constructive res judicata was decided by Trial 
Court in favour of appellant – Such finding was agreed to by 
the First Appellate Court, but wrongly reversed in the impugned 
judgment by High Court – Appellant by virtue of 1960 deed was 
the owner of a large portion of land – According to him ‘R’, had 
wrongly sold off parts thereof in two independent transactions 
therefore, acting through his parents, he challenged both those 
transactions – Where and how does the question of asserting 
his right over the larger parcel of land emerge when the same 
already rests undisputedly in his favour by virtue of the 1960 
deed – When the apprehension arose by virtue of ‘R’s application 
to mutate his name in the relevant records with respect to the 
entire property in excess of what was part of sale transaction, 
came the suit by the appellant, asserting his right which had, in 
his view, be hitherto unquestioned – This question missed the 
attention of the High Court – Further, the effect of agreeing with 
the High Court would be that the appellant would be deprived 
of the entire property given to him by ‘MR’, and that has been 
in his name ever since he was born or shortly thereafter – The 
application of law, especially when it comes to inter family disputes 
is not akin to enforcing the black letter of the law but calls upon 
the Judge to understand the surrounding facts and circumstances 
and in the light thereof come to a conclusion in accordance with 
law – The part of the appellant’s right which was threatened was 
challenged so in effect, he through his guardians, was protecting 
his rights – There was no occasion to do anything further – When 
this is the reality, to apply a principle of law which would lead to 
an unduly harsh and unjust consequence, would be offensive to 

242
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
both law and equity in these circumstances – Impugned judgment 
set aside. [Paras 8.1, 8.2, 11, 13, 14]
Code of Civil Procedure 1908 – s.11 – Constructive res 
judicata – Principles of:
Held: Constructive res judicata mandates that all grounds that 
might and ought to have been employed in the proceedings, 
should be employed to avoid multiplicity of proceedings – It is a 
deeming fiction of law, but its application is not uniform and instead 
is dependent on the facts and circumstances of a particular case 
with ‘due regard to ambit of the earlier proceedings’ and ‘the nexus 
which the matter bears to the nature of the controversy’ – This 
principle is founded on public policy – It is a generally acceptable 
rule that one person should not be “vexed twice over” for the same 
kind of litigation – As such, it also applies to the proceedings u/
Art.226/32 of the Constitution of India – In respect of ‘ought’, the 
said word implies the threshold to be above mere possibility – 
The parties while conducting litigation are expected to apply 
‘reasonable diligence’, ‘legitimate purview’ – It is from this lens 
that it shall be adjudicated whether all issues that were properly 
arising to the litigation; which ought to have been raised; were 
raised or not – The principle applies with equal force in cases 
where the ground that might and ought to have been raised was 
not done, on account of negligence, inadvertence or accident – In 
other words, might and ought to apply cumulatively with full force, 
without exception – The party therefore commits these errors at 
their own peril. [Paras 8.1-8.6]
Case Law Cited
Nagabhushanammal v. C. Chandikeswaralingam [2016] 2 SCR 
19 : (2016) 4 SCC 434; Daryao v. State of U.P., 1961 SCC OnLine 
SC 21; State of Karnataka v. All India Manufacturers Organisation 
[2006] Supp. 1 SCR 86 : (2006) 4 SCC 683; Samir Kumar 
Majumder v. Union of India (2024) 16 SCC 738 – referred to.
Kameswar Pershad v. Rajkumari Ruttun Koer, 1892 SCC OnLine 
PC 16 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Civil Procedure 1908; Constitution of India.

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
243
Makardhwaj Ram v. Jagdish Rai (Dead) Th. Lrs. & Anr.
List of Keywords
Constructive res judicata; Suit not barred by constructive res 
judicata; Constructive res judicata also applies where the ground 
that might and ought to have been raised was not done on account 
of negligence, inadvertence or accident; All grounds that might and 
ought to have been raised; “might”; “ought”; Inter family disputes; 
Earlier proceedings substantially similar; Earlier suits; Subject matter 
of suit separate and distinct from the earlier suits; Law and equity; 
Mutation of name with respect to the entire property in excess of 
what was part of sale transaction; Inferior claim of cancellation of sale 
deed; Right over larger parcel of land; Deprived of entire property.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
2950 of 2011
From the Judgment and Order dated 18.09.2009 of the High Court 
of Chhatisgarh at Bilaspur in SA No. 617 of 1996.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Vivek Singh, Lakshmi Raman Singh, Ms. Udita Singh, C.P. Rajwar, 
Krishan Kumar, Mrs. Divya Sharma.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Shalya Agarwal, Gopal Prasad.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
1.	
This Civil Appeal has been preferred by the original plaintiffs laying 
challenge to judgment and order dated 18th September 2009 passed 
by the High Court of Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur in Second Appeal No. 
617 of 1996. At hand is a long-standing property dispute that began 
somewhere in the 1960s. The parties in the dispute are in one way 
or another related to one Gokul Rai. A family chart shall be useful 
in contextualising the parties and the facts:

244
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2.	
The properties in question belonged to the grandson of said Gokul 
Rai i.e., Mahabir Rai. On 27th July 1960, Mahabir Rai, transferred 
a portion of his property totalling to 95.80 acres in favour of his 
mother, Raj Mohani @Roopjhari and his son, the present appellant, 
Makardhwaj. On 23rd April 1962, Mahabir Rai, his wife Gulmati, 
and mother Raj Mohani @ Rupjhari, executed a General Power of 
Attorney1 in favour of Rambhajan, who is Mahabir Rai’s cousin that 
is the son of Baldeo’s sister-Dhanmati. In 1969 on two separate 
occasions i.e., 27th January 1969 and 4th February 1969, Rambhajan, 
using the said GPA sold 21.43 acres land to one Prem Prakash, and 
33.76 acres to one Chandra Sao. The said GPA was cancelled by 
the grantors on 25th June 1969. Thereafter, Mahabir Rai, filed a suit 
seeking cancellation of sale deed qua the transfer of 21.43 acres of 
land dated 27th January 1969. Said suit was eventually dismissed by 
1	
GPA

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
245
Makardhwaj Ram v. Jagdish Rai (Dead) Th. Lrs. & Anr.
the Civil Judge, Class II, Jaishpor Nagar, vide judgment dated 21st 
October 1989 on the ground that the present appellant, successor-
in-interest of the original plaintiff Mahabir Rai, could not establish his 
position as his successor-in-interest. The second transfer of 33.76 
acres was challenged by Gulmati, as legal guardian of her minor 
children which too was dismissed by judgment dated 31st July 1975. 
In the year 1985 Rambhajan applied for mutating his name in the 
Revenue Records which was dismissed at the first instance but 
allowed on appeal. This mutation pushed the plaintiff, Makardhwaj, 
the appellant herein to file yet another civil suit. It is this proceeding 
that has culminated into the present appeal. 
3.	
The suit2 has been filed for declaration of title and possession against 
Rambhajan. By judgment dated 7th May 1993, the suit was partly 
decreed. As against the claim of 95.8 acres the plaintiff was held to 
be entitled to 43.69 acres. Aggrieved thereof successor- in-interest 
of Rambhajan i.e., Jagdish Rai, further represented through LRs, 
appealed to the Additional District Judge, Raigarh, which came to 
be dismissed on 11th March 1996. Still aggrieved, he took the matter 
to the High Court, where, in terms of the impugned judgment, the 
judgment and decree of the Courts below were set aside, dismissing 
the suit as being barred by constructive res judicata.
4.	
The case of the appellant is that there is a difference between the 
two rounds of litigation regarding the properties since the earlier 
suits were filed on the basis of sale deeds seeking to recover 
the lands lost as a result thereof and the latter have been filed 
seeking a declaration of title and possession in respect of the land 
that remained after the alienations that have been made. In other 
words, the subject matter of the suit is separate and distinct from 
the earlier suits. With reference to Nagabhushanammal v. C. 
Chandikeswaralingam3, it is submitted that for res judicata to apply, 
it has to be shown that not only the cause of action was the same, 
but also that the plaintiff had the occasion to seek the same relief 
in the earlier proceedings. As a secondary argument, it is submitted 
that the question of res judicata is a mixed question of law and fact 
and while the defendants did take the plea, but they did not file the 
2	
Civil Suit No.195A/87
3	
(2016) 4 SCC 434

246
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
requisite documents such as the plaint, written statement and other 
documents to establish their claim. 
5.	
Per contra, the respondents contend that there is no requirement of 
furnishing plaint, written statement and other documents to plead res 
judicata, when the judgment in the case reflects same and similar 
cause of action. It is further submitted that if the sale deed of 1960 
was indeed the source of claim of the plaintiff, that ought to have 
been pleaded as the main ground and that the ground of being the 
exclusive owner of the lands in question by virtue of 1960 sale deed 
was although available, not taken. The same was also available 
to them to challenge the subsequent authorization/alienation (to 
Rambhajan through GPA) but was not taken and as such, while 
claiming right over the land based on inheritance, such ground was 
intentionally given up and is thus barred. 
6.	
Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure 19084 deals with res 
judicata. It reads as under:
“11. Res judicata.—No Court shall try any suit or issue in 
which the matter directly and substantially in issue has 
been directly and substantially in issue in a former suit 
between the same parties, or between parties under whom 
they or any of them claim, litigating under the same title, 
in a Court competent to try such subsequent suit or the 
suit in which such issue has been subsequently raised, 
and has been heard and finally decided by such Court.”
Explanation IV thereof provides for rule of constructive res judicata 
which is as follows:
“Explanation IV.—Any matter which might and ought to 
have been made ground of defence or attack in such 
former suit shall be deemed to have been a matter directly 
and substantially in issue in such suit.”
7.	
The concept of constructive res judicata has been extensively 
dealt with by this Court as also the Privy Council in its judgments. 
Some of those judgments are referred to hereinbelow to facilitate 
an understanding:
4	
CPC

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
247
Makardhwaj Ram v. Jagdish Rai (Dead) Th. Lrs. & Anr.
7.1.	 Morris LJ in Kameswar Pershad v. Rajkumari Ruttun Koer5, 
observed:
…That it “might” have been, made a ground of attack 
is clear. That it “ought” to have been, appears to their 
Lordships to depend upon the particular fact of each 
case. Where matters are so dissimilar that their union 
might lead to confusion, the construction of the word 
“ought” would become important…
7.2.	 In Daryao v. State of U.P.6, it was held that the principle of 
res judicata applies to writ proceedings as well. Regarding the 
nature of the rule, it has been observed as follows: 
“9. But, is the rule of res judicata merely a technical 
rule or is it based on high public policy? If the rule 
of res judicata itself embodies a principle of public 
policy which in turn is an essential part of the rule of 
law then the objection that the rule cannot be invoked 
where fundamental rights are in question may lose 
much of its validity. Now, the rule of res judicata as 
indicated in Section 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure 
has no doubt some technical aspects, for instance 
the rule of constructive res judicata may be said to 
be technical; but the basis on which the said rule 
rests is founded on considerations of public policy. 
It is in the interest of the public at large that a finality 
should attach to the binding decisions pronounced by 
Courts of competent jurisdiction, and it is also in the 
public interest that individuals should not be vexed 
twice over with the same kind of litigation. If these 
two principles form the foundation of the general rule 
of res judicata they cannot be treated as irrelevant or 
inadmissible even in dealing with fundamental rights 
in petitions filed under Article 32.”
(emphasis supplied)
5	
1892 SCC OnLine PC 16
6	
1961 SCC OnLine SC 21

248
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
7.3.	 In State of Karnataka v. All India Manufacturers 
Organisation7, B.N. Srikrishna J., writing for the Court, 
while dealing with this issue referred to a number of English 
judgments in the following manner:
“38. The spirit behind Explanation IV is brought out in the 
pithy words of Wigram, V.C. in Henderson v. Henderson 
[(1843-60) All ER Rep 378 : (1843) 3 Hare 100 : 67 ER 
313] as follows: (All ER pp. 381 I-382 A)
“The plea of res judicata applies, except in 
special case (sic), not only to points upon 
which the court was actually required by the 
parties to form an opinion and pronounce a 
judgment, but to every point which properly 
belonged to the subject of litigation and which 
the parties, exercising reasonable diligence, 
might have brought forward at the time.” [Ibid., 
at pp. 381-82]
39. In Greenhalgh v. Mallard [(1947) 2 All ER 255 (CA)] 
(hereinafter “Greenhalgh [(1947) 2 All ER 255 (CA)] ”), 
Somervell, L.J. observed thus:
“I think that on the authorities to which I will refer 
it would be accurate to say that res judicata for 
this purpose is not confined to the issues which 
the court is actually asked to decide, but that 
it covers issues or facts which are so clearly 
part of the subject-matter of the litigation and 
so clearly could have been raised that it would 
be an abuse of the process of the court to allow 
a new proceeding to be started in respect of 
them.” [Ibid., at p. 257 H (emphasis supplied)]
40. The judgment in Greenhalgh [(1947) 2 All ER 255 (CA)] 
was approvingly referred to by this Court in State of U.P. v. 
Nawab Hussain [(1977) 2 SCC 806 at p. 809, para 4 : 
1977 SCC (L&S) 362] . Combining all these principles, a 
Constitution Bench of this Court in Direct Recruit Class 
7	
(2006) 4 SCC 683

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
249
Makardhwaj Ram v. Jagdish Rai (Dead) Th. Lrs. & Anr.
II Engg. Officers’ Assn. v. State of Maharashtra [(1990) 
2 SCC 715 : 1990 SCC (L&S) 339 : (1990) 13 ATC 
348] expounded on the principle laid down in Forward 
Construction Co. [(1986) 1 SCC 100] by holding that:
“[A]n adjudication is conclusive and final not 
only as to the actual matter determined but as 
to every other matter which the parties might 
and ought to have litigated and have had 
(sic) decided as incidental to or essentially 
connected with (sic) subject-matter of the 
litigation and every matter coming into the 
legitimate purview of the original action both 
in respect of the matters of claim and defence. 
Thus, the principle of constructive res judicata 
underlying Explanation IV of Section 11 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure was applied to writ 
case. We, accordingly hold that the writ case 
is fit to be dismissed on the ground of res 
judicata.” [Ibid., at p. 741, para 35, per L.M. 
Sharma, J.]
7.4.	 Recently, in Samir Kumar Majumder v. Union of India8, K.V. 
Viswanathan J., considered the law on constructive res judicata 
while dealing with an employment dispute as follows:
“Law on constructive res judicata
33. Almost two centuries ago, in Henderson v. 
Henderson [Henderson v. Henderson, (1843) 3 
Hare 100 : 67 ER 313] , the Vice-Chancellor Sir 
James Wigram felicitously puts the principle thus: 
(ER p. 319)
“In trying this question I believe I state 
the rule of the Court correctly when I say 
that, where a given matter becomes the 
subject of litigation in, and of adjudication 
by, a court of competent jurisdiction, the 
Court requires the parties to that litigation 
8	
(2024) 16 SCC 738 

250
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to bring forward their whole case, and will 
not (except under special circumstances) 
permit the same parties to open the same 
subject of litigation in respect of matter 
which might have been brought forward 
as part of the subject in contest, but which 
was not brought forward, only because they 
have, from negligence, inadvertence, or 
even accident, omitted part of their case. 
The plea of res judicata applies, except 
in special cases, not only to points upon 
which the Court was actually required 
by the parties to form an opinion and 
pronounce a judgment, but to every point 
which properly belonged to the subject of 
litigation, and which the parties, exercising 
reasonable diligence, might have brought 
forward at the time.”
8.	
From a considered perusal of the above judgments, the following 
aspect of constructive res judicata can be highlighted:
8.1	 Constructive res judicata mandates that all grounds that might 
and ought to have been employed in the proceedings, should 
be employed to avoid multiplicity of proceedings.
8.2	 It is a deeming fiction of law, but its application is not uniform 
and instead is dependent on the facts and circumstances 
of a particular case with ‘due regard to ambit of the earlier 
proceedings’ and ‘the nexus which the matter bears to the 
nature of the controversy’.
8.3	 This principle is founded on public policy. It is a generally 
acceptable rule that one person should not be “vexed twice 
over” for the same kind of litigation. As such, it also applies to 
the proceedings under Article 226/32 of the Constitution of India. 
8.4	 In respect of ‘ought’ referred above, the said word implies the 
threshold to be above mere possibility.
8.5	 The parties while conducting litigation are expected to apply 
‘reasonable diligence’, ‘legitimate purview’. It is from this lens 
that it shall be adjudicated whether all issues that were properly 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
251
Makardhwaj Ram v. Jagdish Rai (Dead) Th. Lrs. & Anr.
arising to the litigation; which ought to have been raised; were 
raised or not?
8.6	 The principle applies with equal force in cases where the 
ground that might and ought to have been raised was not done, 
on account of negligence, inadvertence or accident. In other 
words, might and ought to apply cumulatively with full force, 
without exception. The party therefore commits these errors 
at their own peril.
9.	
Applying these principles to the present facts, the question is whether 
the earlier proceedings provided opportunity enough for the plaintiff 
by being substantially similar, to raise the point of his ownership of 
the suit properties by virtue of the 1960 sale deed when the main 
ground urged otherwise was cancellation of sale deed. 
10.	 From the above narration of facts, it is clear that the present 
proceedings are indirectly the culmination of a long history of litigation. 
Although the previous proceedings are not directly relevant they may 
nonetheless be set out below in a tabular form for completeness:
C.S. No. 9A of 1974 and its appeal 157/1975
Challenging Sale deed dated 4th February 1969
DATE OF 
INSTITUTION
DATE OF 
DECISION
PLAINTIFF/
APPELLANT
DEFENDANTS/
RESPONDNETS
RESULT
1974
31.07.1975
Plaintiff
1. Makardhwaj Ram 
(Minor)
2. Mst. Sukhmani 
(sister) (Minor)
3. Mst. Basanti (sister) 
(Minor)
4. Mst. Gulmati 
(mother) (Gaurdian)
Defendants
1. Chander 
Sao (3rd Party 
Purchaser)
2. Rambhajan
Dismissed 
1975
14.10.1981 
Appellants 
1. Makardhwaj Ram 
(Minor)
2. Mst. Sukhmani 
(sister) (Minor)
3. Mst. Basanti (sister) 
(Minor)
4. Mst. Gulmat 
(mother) (Gaurdian)
Respondents
1. Chander 
Sao (3rd Party 
Purchaser)
2. Rambhajan
Dismissed

252
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Civil Suit. 5A/87 (Earlier 7A/69) and its appeal 16A/90
Challenging Sale deed dated 17th January 1969
DATE OF 
INSTITUTION
DATE OF 
DECISION
PLAINTIFF/
APPELLANT
DEFENDANTS/
RESPONDNETS
RESULT
1987
21.10.1989
1. Makardhwaj 
Ram (through 
mother as 
guardian)
1. Jagdish Rai
2. Prem Prakash 
Rai (3rd Party 
Purchaser)
Dismissed
1990
28.06.1994
Appellants
1. Makardhwaj 
Ram (through 
mother as 
guardian)
Respondents
1. Jagdish Rai
2. Prem Prakash 
Rai (3rd Party 
Purchaser)
Dismissed
Present suit 195A/87 and the first and second appeal
DATE OF 
INSTITUTION
DATE OF 
DECISION
PLAINTIFF/
APPELLANT
DEFENDANTS/
RESPONDNETS
RESULT
1986
07.5.1993
Plaintiff
1. Makardhwaj 
Ram (Plaintiff)
Defendant
1. Rambhajan
2. State of MP 
(through district 
collector
Decreed
1993
11.03.1996
Appellant
1. Rambhajan 
2. State of MP
Respondent 
Makardhwaj
Appeal 
dismissed
1996
18.09.2009 
Appellant
1. Rambhajan 
2. State of MP
Respondent 
Makardhwaj
Second 
Appeal 
allowed
11.	 To put the question framed by us in perspective, the total piece of 
land with respect to which the above proceedings have taken place 
was approximately 95.80 acres. The first sale deed to Prem Prakash 
Rai, was 21.43 acres and the second sale deed was to Chander Sao 
for 33.76 acres. For one reason or another both the suits seeking 
cancellation of the sale deeds made by Rambhajan as GPA holder, 
were dismissed. Undisputedly, when both those suits were instituted 
the appellant-plaintiff was a minor. The third suit that is before us 

[2026] 7 S.C.R. 
253
Makardhwaj Ram v. Jagdish Rai (Dead) Th. Lrs. & Anr.
was filed on 1st May 1986 seeking declaration and possession. The 
issue of constructive res judicata was framed by the Trial Court and 
decided in favour of appellant-plaintiff. Such finding was agreed to by 
the First Appellate Court, but reversed in impugned judgment by the 
High Court. We may record here itself that we are not in agreement 
with the High Court. 
12.	 The High Court proceeds on the premise that in both the earlier suits 
the appellant-plaintiff could have claimed the right over subject land 
to be flowing from the 1960 deed executed in his favour by Mahabir 
Rai. Since he did not do that and instead chose to pursue an inferior 
claim of cancellation of sale deed, the stronger one stood given up 
by application of constructive res judicata. 
13.	 On first blush, this reasoning appears attractive but, in our view, 
cannot be countenanced for it perhaps misses the mark. 
The appellant-plaintiff by virtue of 1960 deed was the owner of a 
large portion of land. According to him Rambhajan, had wrongly sold 
off parts thereof in two independent transactions therefore, acting 
through his parents, he challenged both those transactions. Where 
and how does the question of asserting his right over the larger 
parcel of land emerge when the same already rests undisputedly 
in his favour by virtue of the 1960 deed? When the apprehension 
arose by virtue of Rambhajan’s application to mutate his name in 
the relevant records with respect to the entire property in excess 
of what was part of sale transaction, came the suit by Makardhwaj, 
asserting his right which had, in his view, be hitherto unquestioned. 
This question missed the attention of the High Court. 
14.	 It be also observed that the effect of agreeing with the High Court 
would be that the appellant-plaintiff would be deprived of the entire 
property given to him by Mahabir Rai, and that has been in his 
name ever since he was born or shortly thereafter. The application 
of law, especially when it comes to inter family disputes is not akin 
to enforcing the black letter of the law but calls upon the Judge to 
understand the surrounding facts and circumstances and in the light 
thereof come to a conclusion in accordance with law. The part of the 
appellant-plaintiff’s right which was threatened was challenged so 
in effect, he through his guardians, was protecting his rights. There 
was no occasion to do anything further. When this is the reality, to 
apply a principle of law which would lead to an unduly harsh and 

254
[2026] 7 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
unjust consequence, would be offensive to both law and equity in 
these circumstances. As such, the impugned judgment must be set 
aside. Ordered accordingly. 
15.	 Appeal is allowed. The parties to take recourse in law as may be 
permissible. They shall bear their own costs.
Pending applications stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
