[2026] 1 S.C.R. 395 : 2026 INSC 35
Muslimveetil Chalakkal Ahammed Haji  
v. 
Sakeena Beevi
(Civil Appeal No. 3894 of 2022)
07 January 2026
[Vikram Nath and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the issue of limitation was erroneously decided by the trial 
Court as well as the High Court, leading to an unjustified rejection 
of the suit for specific performance of agreement to sell filed by 
the appellant; whether the issue of readiness and willingness was 
also wrongly decided against the appellant and in favour of the 
defendant-respondent; whether the High Court committed grave 
error in the facts as well as in law in dismissing the appeal filed 
by the appellant and affirming the judgment of the trial Court.
Headnotes†
Specific Relief Act, 1963 – Suit for specific performance of 
agreement to sell – Rejection of, when not justified – After the 
death of the defendant-respondent’s father, the plaint schedule 
property together with the school building standing thereon 
and all appurtenant improvements, including ownership and 
management of the school, devolved upon his nine children, 
including the defendant-respondent – All the nine legal heirs 
executed an unregistered power of attorney (Exh. A4) in favour 
of the eldest son who executed an agreement for sale (Exh. A1) 
in favour of the appellant, the date of execution whereunder 
was extended thrice – Respondent revoked the unregistered 
power of attorney (Exh. A4) issued in favour of her brother – 
Later, she executed an affidavit (Exh. A5) ratifying the power 
of attorney (Exh. A4) and the acts carried out thereunder, and 
further expressing her consent to transfer her share in the 
plaint schedule property – Thereafter, the remaining eight 
siblings executed a sale deed conveying their collective 
10/11th share in the entire chunk of land on which the school 
building exists in favour of the appellant – However, later as 
the respondent refused to execute the sale deed in respect of 
her share, the appellant filed suit for specific performance – 
Dismissed by trial Court on the ground of limitation – Appellant 
* Author

396
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
filed appeal before High Court, dismissed on the grounds of 
lack of readiness and willingness on the part of the appellant 
to get the sale deed executed as well as on the ground of 
limitation – Interference with:
Held: Impugned judgments set aside – High Court erred in the facts 
as well as in law in dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant 
and affirming the judgment of the trial Court – The factum of three 
extensions stands duly proved by the appellant – Also, the theory 
projected by the respondent that the power of attorney executed 
by her in favour of her brother stood revoked is ex facie untenable 
and contrary to the record – The affidavit (Exh. A5) executed by 
the defendant which was neither disputed nor denied tilts the 
balance in favour of the appellant which clearly establish that the 
respondent not only ratified the acts performed by the power of 
attorney holder, her brother but also expressly conveyed her no-
objection to the change in management and so also the ownership 
of the school and the properties appurtenant thereto in favour of 
the appellant – Once the two facts, i.e., the publication of notice in 
the year 2012 for revocation of the unregistered power of attorney 
(Exh. A4) and the affidavit dtd.30.04.13 are cumulatively taken into 
account, limitation would start running from the later date because 
it is, at that stage, that the respondent finally refused execution of 
sale deed to the extent of her share in the suit property – Thus, 
the issue of limitation was erroneously decided by the trial Court 
as well as the High Court, leading to an unjustified rejection of 
the suit instituted by the appellant – The suit was instituted within 
the prescribed period of limitation, reckoned from the date of 
the affidavit – On facts, the issue of readiness and willingness 
was also wrongly decided against the appellant and in favour of 
the respondent – Appellant entitled to conveyance of the 1/11th 
share of the respondent in the plaint schedule property – Further 
directions issued – Limitation Act, 1963 – Kerala Education Rules, 
1959 – Kerala Education Rules, 2005. [Paras 34-41]
List of Acts
Specific Relief Act, 1963; Kerala Education Rules, 1959; Limitation 
Act, 1963; Kerala Education Rules, 2005.
List of Keywords
Suit for specific performance of agreement to sell; Unjustified 
rejection of the suit for specific performance of agreement to 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
397
Muslimveetil Chalakkal Ahammed Haji v. Sakeena Beevi
sell; Suit was instituted within the prescribed period of limitation; 
Readiness and willingness; Power of attorney not revoked; 
Revocation of the unregistered power of attorney; Acts performed 
by the power of attorney holder ratified.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3894  
of 2022
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.10.2020 of the High Court 
of Kerala at Ernakulam in RFA No. 267 of 2016
With
Civil Appeal No. 3895 of 2022
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Gaurav Agrawal, Sr. Adv., Mohammed Sadique T.A., Mrs. Anu K Joy, 
Alim Anvar, Santhosh K, Mrs. Devika A.L., Nishe Rajen Shonker.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Dr. Menaka Guruswamy, R. NedumarSan, Sr. Advs., Manas P. 
Hameed, Ms. Ipsita Ojal, Jude James, Harshad V. Hameed, Dileep 
Poolakkot, Mrs. Ashly Harshad, Mahabir Singh, Anshul Saharan.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Mehta, J.
Civil Appeal No(s). 3894 of 2022
1.	
Heard.
2.	
The present appeal is directed against the final judgment and order 
dated 16th October, 2020, passed by the High Court of Kerala at 
Ernakulam1 in R.F.A. No. 267 of 2016, whereby the first appeal 
preferred by Muslimveetil Chalakkal Ahammed Haji2 came to be 
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “High Court”.
2	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “plaintiff-appellant”.

398
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
dismissed, affirming the judgment and decree dated 30th October, 
2015, rendered by the Sub-Judge, Chavakkad3 in Original Suit No.862 
of 2013, by which the suit instituted by the plaintiff-appellant seeking 
specific performance of agreement to sell was dismissed.
Factual Background
3.	
Briefly stated, the facts relevant and essential for the disposal of the 
appeal are noted hereinbelow.
4.	
The plaint schedule property admeasuring approximately three acres 
thirty-five cents fell to the share of Shri Buquarayil Valappilakkayil 
Seethi Thangal (hereinafter ‘Seethi Thangal’), father of the 
respondent–Sakeena Beevi4, by virtue of a registered partition 
deed bearing No. 1274 of 1985, registered in the office of the Sub-
Registrar, Mullassery.
5.	
Pursuant to the death of Seethi Thangal on 22nd August, 2002, 
the plaint schedule property, comprised in Survey No. 116/7 of 
Kundazhiyoor Desom, together with the school building standing 
thereon and all appurtenant improvements, including ownership 
and management of the school, devolved upon his nine children, 
including the defendant-respondent.
6.	
All the nine legal heirs of Seethi Thangal executed an unregistered 
power of attorney (Exh. A4) in favour of the eldest son, Shri 
Muhammed Rafi Thangal, on 3rd September, 2002. Subsequently, 
on 4th September, 2002, the respondent Sakeena Beevi executed 
a separate registered power of attorney (Exh. B1) in favour of her 
son Shri Rasheeq Ahmed (DW-1).
7.	
The eldest brother, namely, Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal, executed 
an agreement for sale (Exh. A1) dated 14th May, 2007 in favour of the 
plaintiff-appellant for a total consideration of Rs.2,70,00,000/-. A sum 
of Rs.25,00,000/- was paid as an advance at the time of execution 
of the agreement. The date of execution under the agreement 
(Exh. A1) was extended on three occasions, i.e., on 14th April, 2008 
[Exh. A1(a)], 7th August, 2010 [Exh. A1(b)], and 7th July, 2011 [Exh. 
A1(c)]. On 14th November, 2012, the defendant-respondent caused 
3	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “trial Court”.
4	
 Hereinafter, referred to as the “defendant-respondent”.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
399
Muslimveetil Chalakkal Ahammed Haji v. Sakeena Beevi
publication of a newspaper notice revoking the unregistered power of 
attorney (Exh. A4) issued in favour of Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal.
8.	
On 30th April, 2013, the defendant-respondent executed an affidavit 
(Exh. A5) ratifying the power of attorney (Exh. A4) and the acts carried 
out thereunder, and further expressing her consent to transfer her 
share in the plaint schedule property. Thereafter, on 8th May, 2013, 
the remaining eight siblings executed a sale deed conveying their 
collective 10/11th share in the entire chunk of land on which the 
school building exists in favour of the plaintiff-appellant. 
9.	
As the defendant-respondent refused to execute the sale deed in 
respect of her share, the plaintiff-appellant instituted a suit for specific 
performance in the year 2013, which came to be registered as O.S. 
No. 862 of 2013 before the trial Court.
10.	 The trial Court dismissed the suit vide judgment and decree dated 30th 
October, 2015, primarily on the ground of limitation, and consequently 
denied the relief of specific performance as well as the alternate relief 
of refund of the advance amount to the plaintiff-appellant.
11.	 Aggrieved thereby, the plaintiff–appellant preferred an appeal before 
the High Court, which, while reversing certain findings recorded by 
the trial Court, ultimately dismissed the suit on the grounds of lack 
of readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff-appellant to 
get the sale deed executed, as required under the Specific Relief 
Act, 1963, as well as on the ground of limitation.
12.	 The High Court held that the plaintiff-appellant failed to establish his 
continued readiness and willingness to perform the contract. It was 
observed that the payments made and the endorsements extending 
the agreement were obtained only from Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal, 
the brother of the defendant–respondent, who lacked valid authority 
to execute and extend the contract after the defendant–respondent 
had executed a registered power of attorney (Exh.B1) in favour of 
her son Shri Rafeeq Ahmed (DW-1) thereby, by a deeming fiction, 
revoking the earlier unregistered power of attorney. Consequently, 
the payments made to Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal were held not 
to be binding on the defendant–respondent.
13.	 The High Court further held that the agreement had become time-
barred, observing that the breach on the part of the plaintiff-appellant 
occurred on 14th July, 2008, whereas the suit came to be instituted 

400
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in the year 2013, well beyond the period of three years prescribed 
under Article 54 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963.
14.	 The above judgment of the High Court is the subject matter of 
challenge in the present appeal by way of special leave. 
15.	 It needs to be noted that during the pendency of the appeal, the 
parties were referred to mediation; however, the mediation efforts 
did not fructify in a settlement. Further, during the course of the 
hearing, Shri Gaurav Agrawal, learned senior counsel appearing for 
the plaintiff-appellant, on instructions, offered a sum of Rs.75,00,000/- 
to the defendant-respondent, as fair value for her 1/11th share which 
offer was declined outright.
Submissions on behalf of the plaintiff-appellant
16.	 Shri Gaurav Agrawal, learned senior counsel appearing for the 
plaintiff-appellant urged that although the plaintiff-appellant could 
have relinquished the said 1/11th share of the defendant-respondent in 
plaint schedule property, such a course would render the functioning 
of the school unviable and in breach of the requirements under the 
Kerala Education Rules, 1959, which mandates a minimum extent 
of three acres of land for running a higher secondary school.
17.	 Shri Agrawal drew the Court’s attention to the affidavit (Exh. A5) 
dated 30th April, 2013 sworn by the defendant-respondent, whereby 
the agreement in favour of the plaintiff–appellant was affirmed and 
ratified. The said affidavit (Exh. A5) is an admitted document and 
reads as under: -
“I, Mrs. B.V. Sakeena Beevi, aged 59 years, presently 
residing at Bukharyil Valapil House, W/o Fakrudheen 
Thangal, Bukharayil Ayittandiyil, Mathilakam Post - 680 
685 do hereby solemnly affirm and state as follows:
That myself one the legal heirs of deceased Mr. B.V. 
seethe Thangal, Ex. M.L.A., along with other legal heirs, 
had executed a valid power of attorney in favour of Mr. B.V. 
Muhammed Raphy Thangal, residing at Bukharayil Valappil 
house, Venkitangu, P.O. Padoor, on 3rd September 2002 
regarding the property in Re-Survey No. 116/7 in Padoor 
Desam, Situated within the Mullassery Sub registrar Office. 
While the Power of Attorney to various officials including 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
401
Muslimveetil Chalakkal Ahammed Haji v. Sakeena Beevi
the Assistant Educational Officer, Mullassery. Now we 
have amicably settled all disputes and I hereby ratify 
the acts of the said Power of Attorney Holder Mr. B.V. 
Muhammed Raphy Thangal. I have no objection to 
perform all acts, deeds and things as assigned in the 
said Power of Attorney Holder Mr. B.V. Muhammed 
Raphy Thangal. I have no objection to perform all acts, 
deeds and things as assigned in the said Power of 
Attorney by me. I do hereby undertake to carry out the 
terms and conditions set out in the said Power of Attorney 
by me. I do hereby undertake to carry out the terms and 
conditions set out in the said Power of Attorney and I will be 
personally bound by the terms and also I will be personally 
present whenever necessary. I have no objections in 
changing management involving ownership of Aleemul 
Islam Higher Secondary School, and ownership of 
properties of the above said school, in favour of Mr. 
Ahammed Haji, S/o Moidunni, Muslim Veettil Chalakkal 
House, Kundaliyoor desom, Engandiyoor amsom, 
as already submitted through my power of attorney 
holder.
What is stated above is true to the best of my knowledge 
and belief.
Dated this the 30th day of April, 2013.”
[Emphasis supplied]
18.	 Shri Agrawal contended that once the defendant–respondent had 
agreed to the terms of the transaction and expressly conveyed her 
no-objection for transfer of ownership of the plaint schedule property 
through her power of attorney holder Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal, 
the power of attorney executed (Exh. A4) in his favour, by necessary 
implication, stood ratified and reaffirmed, and the acts performed by 
the said power of attorney holder could not thereafter be questioned 
or doubted in a Court of law. He further urged that the findings 
recorded by the trial Court as well as the High Court, holding that the 
unregistered power of attorney (Exh. A4) executed by the defendant-
respondent in favour of her brother, Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal, 
stood revoked with effect from 4th September, 2002, are contrary 
to the material available on record and suffer from manifest error. 

402
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
19.	 He further drew the Court’s attention to the written statement filed 
by the defendant–respondent, wherein the validity of the agreement 
was expressly admitted, and the only objection raised pertained 
to limitation. It was pointed out that in the written statement, the 
defendant–respondent admitted that the agreement dated 14th May, 
2007 (Exh.A1), was negotiated on her behalf by her son, Shri Rasheeq 
Ahmed, acting as her power of attorney holder. It was reiterated by 
learned senior counsel that the subsequent acts performed by Shri 
Muhammed Rafi Thangal were duly and expressly ratified by the 
defendant–respondent.
20.	 He further submitted that in the entire written statement, the 
defendant–respondent did not deny or dispute the affidavit (Exh. A5) 
dated 30th April, 2013, affirming her ratification of all the acts done 
by Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal in furtherance of the unregistered 
power of attorney (Exh. A4).
21.	 Shri Agrawal also pointed out that the stand taken by the defendant–
respondent that the unregistered power of attorney (Exh. A4) executed 
in favour of Shri Muhammed Rafi stood revoked on 4th September, 
2002 upon execution of the registered power of attorney (Exh. B1) 
in favour of her son Shri Rasheeq Ahmed (DW-1), is belied by the 
fact that she herself affirmed validity of the agreement (Exh. A1) 
dated 14th May, 2007 which was executed by Shri Muhammed Rafi 
Thangal on strength of the disputed unregistered power of attorney 
(Exh. A4). Furthermore, she issued a notice dated 10th November, 
2012 to Shri Muhammed Rafi and the educational authorities, for 
the first time, expressing her intent to revoke the said unregistered 
power of attorney (Exh. A4).
22.	 He further submitted that the trial Court had affirmed the evidentiary 
value of the affidavit (Exh.A5) by treating it as an admission of the 
defendant–respondent, but thereafter proceeded to discard the said 
document on the basis of the testimony of Shri Rasheeq Ahmed 
(DW-1), the son of the defendant-respondent. It was urged that if 
the defendant–respondent had any intention to prove revocation of 
the power of attorney executed in favour of Shri Muhammed Rafi 
Thangal (Exh. A4) or to disown the affidavit (Exh. A5), she ought 
to have stepped into the witness box herself. However, admittedly, 
the defendant–respondent did not enter the witness box during the 
trial.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
403
Muslimveetil Chalakkal Ahammed Haji v. Sakeena Beevi
23.	 He, therefore, urged that it is a fit case wherein this Court should 
exercise its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India 
for balancing the equites by setting aside the impugned judgment 
and directing the specific performance of the agreement to the extent 
of the 1/11th share of the respondent-defendant.
Submissions on behalf of the defendant-respondent
24.	 Per contra, Ms. Menaka Guruswamy, learned senior counsel appearing 
for the defendant–respondent, vehemently and fervently opposed 
the submissions advanced on behalf of the plaintiff–appellant. She 
submitted that the power of attorney (Exh. A4) executed in favour 
of Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal was an unregistered document, 
whereas the power of attorney executed (Exh. B1) in favour of Shri 
Rasheeq Ahmed (DW-1), the son of the defendant–respondent, was 
a registered instrument. It was contended that upon execution of 
the registered power of attorney (Exh. B1), the earlier unregistered 
power of attorney (Exh. A4) stood automatically revoked. 
25.	 Without prejudice to the above, she further contended that the 
unregistered power of attorney (Exh. A4) executed by the defendant-
respondent in favour of her brother, Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal, did 
not authorise him to convey the plaint schedule property to any third 
party without the express consent of the executant, and, therefore, 
the defendant–respondent could not be bound by the acts undertaken 
by Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal acting under the unregistered 
power of attorney (Exh. A4). It was further submitted that the original 
agreement (Exh. A1) inter se the parties, bearing the endorsement of 
Shri Rasheeq Ahmed (DW-1), the son of the defendant–respondent 
and her power of attorney, was executed on 14th May, 2007, and 
only a sum of Rs.25,00,000/- was paid as advance at the time of 
its execution. It was urged that the suit came to be instituted in the 
year 2013 and was thus clearly barred by limitation in view of the 
Article 54 of Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963.
26.	 She further submitted that the affidavit (Exh. A5) was executed solely 
with a view to facilitating the continued functioning of the school 
and not for the purpose of transferring the share of the defendant-
respondent in the suit property. It was contended that the said 
document was, therefore, rightly not relied upon by the trial Court 
as well as the High Court in favour of the plaintiff–appellant. She 

404
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
further submitted that the defendant–respondent is willing to make 
a counter offer to purchase the entire property for a consideration 
of Rs.3 crores, being the amount originally stipulated under the 
agreement (Exh. A1).
27.	 She, therefore, urged that this Court ought not to interfere with 
the concurrent findings of facts recorded by the trial Court and the 
High Court, whereby the suit instituted by the plaintiff-appellant was 
dismissed.
Discussion and Analysis
28.	 We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
advanced at bar and have gone through the material available on 
record.
29.	 At the outset, it may be noted that the plaint schedule 1/11th share 
of the defendant-respondent forms part of a larger tract of land 
admeasuring three acres thirty-five cents originally owned by her 
late father Shri Seethi Thangal. A school was built on the entire 
three acres area and is presently being run by the plaintiff-appellant. 
30.	 The plaintiff-appellant has consistently asserted that, having regard 
to the requirements of the Kerala Education Rules, 1959, the campus 
of a higher secondary school cannot be reduced below three acres 
and, but for such statutory constraint, he would have conveniently 
given up the claim for the 1/11th share of the defendant-respondent 
in the plaint schedule property.
31.	 It is further a matter of record that during the course of hearing of 
the appeal, this Court made efforts to facilitate a settlement through 
mediation, and the plaintiff-appellant offered a handsome amount of 
Rs.75 lakhs to the defendant-respondent. However, the said offer 
was point-blank refused by the defendant-respondent, who seems 
to have been overcome by greed owing to the difficulty faced by 
the plaintiff-appellant who would risk losing the right to operate 
the school in case the land area is reduced to less than three 
acres.
32.	 It is in this background that we shall now proceed to examine the 
material available on record to determine whether the view taken 
by the High Court in affirming the rejection of the suit by the trial 
Court is justified.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
405
Muslimveetil Chalakkal Ahammed Haji v. Sakeena Beevi
33.	 The High Court dismissed the suit primarily on two grounds, namely: -
(i)	
The failure of the plaintiff-appellant to establish readiness 
and willingness to perform his obligations under the contract 
(Exh.A-1);
(ii)	
limitation.
34.	 On the first aspect, it may be noted that the factum of three extensions 
dated 14th April, 2008 (executed by all nine co-sharers); 7th August, 
2010 and 7th July, 2011(executed by the power of attorney holder, 
Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal), stands duly proved by the plaintiff-
appellant through unimpeachable and credible evidence. It was only 
on 14th November, 2012, that the defendant-respondent, for the first 
time, caused publication of a newspaper notice purporting to revoke 
the power of attorney executed in favour of Shri Muhammed Rafi 
Thangal. Furthermore, the defendant-respondent does not even 
dispute the validity of the agreement (Exh. A1) dated 14th May, 
2007 which was executed by Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal acting 
on the unregistered power of attorney (Exh. A4). In this backdrop, 
the theory projected by the respondent that the power of attorney 
executed by her in favour of Shri Muhammed Rafi Thangal stood 
revoked as far back as the year 2002 is ex facie untenable and 
contrary to the record.
35.	 The most crucial and vital document, which, in our considered view, 
tilts the balance in favour of the plaintiff-appellant, is the affidavit (Exh. 
A5) executed by the defendant on 30th April, 2013. The execution 
of the said affidavit (Exh. A5) was neither disputed nor denied by 
the defendant–respondent, who admittedly did not enter the witness 
box in the suit proceedings. Instead, her son Shri Rasheeq Ahmed 
alone was examined as DW-1. A plain reading of the affidavit, 
particularly the highlighted portions (supra) thereof, clearly establish 
that the defendant–respondent not only ratified the acts performed 
by the power of attorney holder, her brother Shri Muhammed Rafi 
Thangal, but also expressly conveyed her no-objection to the change 
in management and so also the ownership of the school and the 
properties appurtenant thereto in favour of the plaintiff-appellant. 
Once the two facts, i.e., the publication of notice in the year 2012 for 
revocation of the unregistered power of attorney (Exh. A4) and the 
affidavit dated 30th April, 2013 are cumulatively taken into account, 
manifestly, limitation would start running from the later date because 

406
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
it is, at that stage, that the respondent-defendant finally refused 
execution of sale deed to the extent of her share in the suit property.
36.	 In this backdrop, we are of the firm view that the issue of limitation 
was erroneously decided by the trial Court as well as the High Court, 
leading to an unjustified rejection of the suit instituted by the appellant.
37.	 As the execution of the affidavit (Exh. A5) is not in dispute, the 
period of limitation would commence from the said date, i.e., 30th 
April, 2013. We have no hesitation in holding that the suit was 
instituted within the prescribed period of limitation, reckoned from 
the date of the affidavit. The said affidavit (Exh. A5) not only ratifies 
the acts performed by the power of attorney holder Shri Muhammed 
Rafi Thangal but also records the unequivocal no-objection of the 
executant–defendant to transfer the ownership of the property in 
favour of the plaintiff-appellant.
38.	 There is no dispute that pursuant to the last extension, the plaintiff-
appellant paid the remaining sale consideration which was accepted 
by eight co-sharers of the defendant-respondent and the partial 
sale deed to that extent, stood executed in his favour on 8th May, 
2013. Thus, the issue of readiness and willingness was also wrongly 
decided against the plaintiff-appellant and in favour of the defendant-
respondent.
39.	 In this background, we are of the firm opinion that the High Court 
committed grave error in the facts as well as in law in dismissing the 
appeal suit filed by the plaintiff-appellant and affirming the judgment 
of the trial Court. 
40.	 The impugned judgments do not stand to scrutiny and are hereby 
set aside. 
41.	 The plaintiff-appellant is held entitled to conveyance of the 1/11th share 
of the defendant–respondent in the plaint schedule property. The trial 
Court shall determine the balance sale consideration payable to the 
defendant-respondent, having regard to the original consideration 
stipulated in the principal agreement for sale (Exh. A1), and shall 
apply simple interest at the rate of 9% thereon. The appellant shall 
deposit the said amount before the trial Court within a period of two 
months from the date of such determination, whereupon a registered 
sale deed in respect of the suit schedule property shall be executed 
in favour of the appellant.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
407
Muslimveetil Chalakkal Ahammed Haji v. Sakeena Beevi
42.	 The appeal is allowed in these terms. No costs.
43.	 Decree be prepared accordingly. 
44.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 3895 OF 2022
45.	 This appeal is preferred against the interim order dated 19th November, 
2021 passed by the High Court in Writ Appeal No.1425 of 2021.
46.	 The writ appeal was preferred by defendant-respondent Sakeena 
Beevi through her power of attorney holder Shri Rasheeq Ahmed 
(DW-1), assailing the order dated 11th October, 2021 passed by 
the learned Single Judge. By the said order, learned Single Judge 
upheld the decision of the Director of Public Instruction (DPI) 
rejecting the representation preferred by the writ petitioner against 
the proposed assignment of the ownership and management of 
Aleemul Islam Higher Secondary School, Padoor to the plaintiff-
appellant (respondent No. 3 before the High Court). Accordingly, the 
writ petition was dismissed and the order of the DPI was affirmed.
47.	 The writ petitioner alleged that since she had not agreed to sell her 
share from the joint family land on which the school existed, the 
total land area of the school fell below 3 acres mandatorily required 
to operate a higher secondary school as per Rule 5A Chapter 3 of 
the Kerala Education Rules, 2005. The DPI, however, rejected the 
representation of the writ petitioner. As stated above, the writ petition 
also came to be rejected. 
48.	 During the pendency of the writ appeal, the District Education 
Officer (DEO), Chavakkad, by order dated 15th November, 2021 
recognised the plaintiff-appellant as the Manager of the school w.e.f. 
3rd September, 2019. 
49.	 The Division Bench stayed the effective operation of the order of 
learned Single Judge dated 11th October, 2021 and also the order 
dated 15th November, 2021 passed by the DEO during pendency of 
the writ appeal. Consequently, the management of the school was 
directed to be vested with the DEO, Chavakkad. While providing for 
this interim arrangement, the Division Bench directed the DEO to 
discharge the functions of the Manager on the joint instructions of 
the writ petitioner and the plaintiff-appellant.

408
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
50.	 Learned counsel representing the State of Kerala vehemently and 
fervently contended that looking to the disputes pending between the 
parties pertaining to 1/11th share of the defendant (writ appellant) in the 
suit schedule property, the High Court, rightly passed the impugned 
order making an interim arrangement for management of the school 
so that the functioning thereof would not suffer. He urged that as 
the DEO has been ordered to act under the instructions of the writ 
petitioner as well as the plaintiff-appellant herein, no prejudice would 
be caused to any of the parties in continuing such arrangement.
51.	 By way of judgment passed in Civil Appeal No. 3894 of 2022, we 
have granted the decree of specific performance in favour of the 
plaintiff-appellant. In view of the above decision, manifestly, the 
plaintiff-appellant would have available to him the full tract of 3 acres 
land for running the school as required under the Kerala Education 
Rules, 2005.
52.	 Hence, there is no further requirement of continuing the interim 
arrangement as directed by the High Court by the impugned order.
53.	 Consequently, the impugned order dated 19th November, 2021 passed 
by the High Court is set aside.
54.	 The appeal is allowed in these terms. No costs.
55.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
