[2026] 1 S.C.R. 467 : 2026 INSC 43
Ultratech Cement Ltd. 
v. 
The State of Gujarat & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 3352-3353 of 2017)
08 January 2026
[Pankaj Mithal* and Prasanna B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether Heavy Earth Moving Machinery or special 
services vehicles or any construction equipment vehicles such as 
Dumpers, Loaders, Excavators, Surface Miners, Dozers, Drills, 
Rock Breakers etc. are “motor vehicles” within the ambit of s.2(28) 
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and are liable to be taxed under 
the Gujarat Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1958.
Headnotes†
Gujarat Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1958 – s.3(1) – Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1988 – s.2(28) – Motor Vehicles – Road Tax – Heavy 
Earth Moving Machinery or special services vehicles or any 
construction equipment vehicles such as Dumpers, Loaders, 
Excavators, Surface Miners, Dozers, Drills, Rock Breakers 
etc., if “motor vehicles” within the ambit of s.2(28) of the 1988 
Act and liable to be taxed under the Gujarat Motor Vehicles 
Tax Act – Appellant for manufacturing work at cement plants, 
using various Heavy Earth Moving Machinery/construction 
equipment or special services vehicle, if liable to pay road 
tax on those vehicles under the Gujarat Tax Act: 
Held: Vehicles used by the appellants not chargeable to tax – 
Vehicles used by the appellants are vehicles of special types-
construction equipment vehicles which are suitable and are meant 
for use for operation and use within the industrial area/factory 
premises/ defined enclosed premises and are not meant for use on 
roads or public roads – They are off-road equipments and as such 
stand excluded not only from the purview of the “motor vehicle” 
as defined u/s.2(28) of the Act but also from tax as Entry 57 of 
List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution only authorizes 
taxation of vehicles suitable for use on roads only – They are not 
* Author

468
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
even chargeable to road tax in view of Schedule I to s.3(1) of the 
Gujarat Tax Act which do not prescribe any tax for such kind of 
vehicles i.e., construction equipment vehicles – However, if any 
such kind of vehicles are found to be used on roads, they would 
not be free from the rigors of s.2(28) of the Act and s.3 of the 
Gujarat Tax Act and also be subject to proceedings for seizure 
and penalty – Impugned judgments and orders holding that the 
vehicles/equipment used by the appellants particularly Dumpers 
were “motor vehicles” under the Act and chargeable to tax, set 
aside – Constitution of India – Entry 57 of List II of the Seventh 
Schedule. [Paras 55, 56]
Case Law Cited
Bolani Ores Ltd. v. State of Orissa [1975] 2 SCR 138 : (1974) 2 
SCC 777; Tarachand Logistic Solutions Limited v. State of Andhra 
Pradesh & Ors., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1851; Chief General 
Manager, Jagannath Area & Ors. v. State of Orissa & Anr. [1996] 
Supp. 6 SCR 570 : (1996) 10 SCC 676; State of Gujarat & Ors. v. 
Akhil Gujarat Pravasi V.S. Mahamandal & Ors. [2004] 3 SCR 956 : 
(2004) 5 SCC 155; K.P. Varghese v. ITO [1982] 1 SCR 629 : (1981) 
4 SCC 173; Travancore Tea Estates Co. Ltd v. State of Kerala & 
Ors. [1980] 3 SCR 1388 : (1980) 3 SCC 619; Union of India and 
Ors. v. Chowgule and Co. Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. [1992] 2 SCR 992 : 
(1992) Supp. 3 SCC 141; M/s Central Coal Fields Ltd. v. State of 
Orissa & Ors. [1992] 2 SCR 982 : (1992) Supp. 3 SCC 133; Bose 
Abraham v. State of Kerala & Anr. [2001] 1 SCR 808 : (2001) 3 
SCC 157 – referred to.
Natwar Parikh & Co. Ltd. v. State of Karnataka & Ors. [2005] Supp. 
2 SCR 1100 : (2005) 7 SCC 364; Western Coalfields Limited v. 
State of Maharashtra & Anr. (2016) 11 SCC 613; Chairman, 
Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation & Ors. v. Santosh & 
Ors. [2013] 3 SCR 720: (2013) 7 SCC 94 – held inapplicable.
List of Acts
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; Gujarat Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 1958; 
Constitution of India; Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989.
List of Keywords
Heavy Earth Moving Machinery; Special services vehicles; 
Construction equipment vehicles; Tax; Chargeable to road tax; 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
469
Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat & Ors.
Industrial area; Factory premises; Roads; Public roads; Off-road 
equipments; Motor vehicle; Seizure and penalty; Registration fee; 
Arrears of tax.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s).  
3352-3353 of 2017
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.07.2011 and 05.10.2012 of 
the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in SCA No. 4704 of 2007, 
RP No. 2598 of 2012, and SCA No. 4704 of 2007, respectively.
With
Civil Appeal No(s). 3357 and 3358 of 2017
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
P. Chidambaram, Nakul Dewan, Sr. Advs., Mahesh Agarwal, Ankur 
Saigal, Rohan Talwar, Himanshu Saraswat, Uday Aditya Jetley 
Pocha, Sathvik Chandrashekar, Naman Agarwal, E. C. Agrawala.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
K. Parameshwar, Sr. Adv., Ms. Deepanwita Priyanka, Prasad 
Hegde, Ms. Veda Singh, Ms. Priyal Sheth.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
Heard Shri P. Chidambaram, senior counsel appearing for the 
appellant-Ultratech Cement Ltd. in Civil Appeal Nos.3352-3353/2017 
and Shri Nakul Dewan, senior counsel appearing for the appellant in 
Civil Appeal Nos.3357 and 3358/2017. Shri K. Parameshwar, senior 
counsel has been heard in opposition on behalf of respondent-State 
of Gujarat.
2.	
All the aforesaid four civil appeals are based on similar facts and 
raises a common question of law, namely; whether Heavy Earth 
Moving Machinery or special services vehicles or any construction 
equipment vehicles such as Dumpers, Loaders, Excavators, Surface 

470
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Miners, Dozers, Drills, Rock Breakers etc. are “motor vehicles” within 
the ambit of Section 2 (28) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 19881 and are 
liable to be taxed under the Gujarat Motor Vehicles Tax Act, 19582.
3.	
The Civil Appeal Nos.3352-3353/2017 are the leading appeals and, 
therefore, the necessary facts in respect of those appeals only are 
being narrated for the sake of convenience.
4.	
The appellant-Ultratech Cement Ltd. is a public limited company 
engaged in manufacturing and marketing of clinker and cement 
products. It has two cement plants known as Gujarat Cement Works 
and Narmada Cement Works in Gujarat. In connection with the 
manufacturing work at the above two plants, it uses various Heavy 
Earth Moving Machinery/construction equipment or special services 
vehicle. 
5.	
In Civil Appeal Nos.3352-3353/2017, the vehicles used are 
predominantly Dumpers and Loaders. In Civil Appeal No.3357/2017, 
the vehicles are Excavators and Surface Miners whereas in Civil 
Appeal No.3358/2017, the vehicles used are Dozers, Drillers, Rock 
Breakers, Excavators and Surface Miners. 
6.	
The Regional Transport Officer, Bhuj, on 04.06.1996 issued a letter 
acknowledging that the Dumpers used by the appellants within the 
private premises do not require registration under the Act. However, 
later on the Transport Commissioner published a press advertisement 
in Gujarati Daily ‘Sandesh’ on 20.11.1999, directing registration of 
all special service vehicles including Dumpers as is mandated by 
Section 39 of the Act and that the appellants are required to pay 
road tax on those vehicles under the Gujarat Tax Act.
7.	
Pursuant thereto, in January 2000, the Regional Transport Officer 
even conducted an inspection of the vehicles used by the appellant 
and directed the appellant to get them registered and pay tax under 
the Gujarat Tax Act. 
8.	
The appellant protested against it and replied to the Transport 
Commissioner on 02.02.2000 that these vehicles were not strictly 
“motor vehicles” as defined under Section 2 (28) of the Act and, 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’
2	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Gujarat Tax Act’

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
471
Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat & Ors.
therefore, they are neither required to be registered nor chargeable 
to tax under the Gujarat Tax Act. The Transport Commissioner 
refused to accept the plea taken by the appellant and insisted for 
the registration of vehicles and payment of road tax.
9.	
It may be worth noting that the vehicles so used by the appellants 
were not meant to be used “on-road”. They were transported to the 
work premises of the appellant in a dismantled condition on trailers 
and were confined to use within the factory/enclosed premises. 
10.	 M/s Bharat Earth Movers Limited, the manufacturers/suppliers of 
the said vehicles, certified by their letter dated 23.03.2000 that 
they have been manufacturing and supplying heavy duty Dumpers 
amongst other range of products for operating in mining/industrial 
off-road activities. These products/vehicles that are manufactured 
and supplied by them are designed as vehicles of a special type to 
be adopted for use only in mining and industrial off-road operations 
and are not meant for use on-road. These products/vehicles are 
transported from their place on trailers to the destination and since 
these are meant for off-road operations, they do not issue any road 
worthiness certificate for the above products/vehicles.
11.	 A similar certificate was issued by M/s Hindustan Motors Limited on 
17.03.2000 regarding the various models of Dumpers manufactured 
and supplied by them. 
12.	 Even M/s Automotive Research Association of India also certified on 
04.06.2004 that such Heavy Earth Moving Machineries are meant for 
off-road use and not on-road. These are carried from one location 
to another in the knocked down condition only on trailers or trucks. 
13.	 These certificates were placed on record by the appellant-Ultratech 
Cement Ltd. and were not controverted by the respondent-State of 
Gujarat.
14.	 The Assistant Regional Transport Officer on 16.01.2002 again 
informed the appellant that the above vehicles/equipment used by it fall 
within the definition of “motor vehicles” and are liable for registration 
and payment of road tax. Subsequently, on 09.11.2006, the Regional 
Transport Officer issued a show cause notice demanding a sum of 
Rs.59,39,401/- towards registration fee, tax, arrears of tax along 
with 2 per cent interest and 25 per cent penalty with effect from the 
year 1999 when aforesaid vehicles/equipment were purchased by 

472
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the appellant. The appellant, after multiple correspondence, were 
pressurized to get the said vehicles/equipment registered and to 
deposit a sum of Rs. 1.36 crores. The appellant got the vehicles 
registered and deposited Rs. 88.45 lakhs under protest.
15.	 In the above scenario, when the show cause notice was issued, the 
appellant approached the High Court of Gujarat for the quashing of 
aforesaid show cause notice dated 09.11.2006 and for the refund of 
the amount deposited by them. The High Court dismissed the petition 
by common judgment and order dated 15.07.2011 holding that the 
vehicles/equipment used by the appellants particularly Dumpers were 
“motor vehicles” under the Act and are chargeable to tax.
16.	 It is against the aforesaid judgment and order of the High Court 
dated 15.07.2011 that the appellant is in appeal before this Court. 
The appellants in other connected appeals are also before this Court 
in a similar fashion. As said earlier, all these appeals give rise to a 
common question of law as framed previously hereinabove, therefore, 
we are dealing with all of them together on the basis of the facts 
contained in Civil Appeal Nos. 3352-3353/2017.
17.	 The primary submission on behalf of the appellants is that Entry 57 
of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India permits 
taxation only of vehicles “suitable for use on roads”, therefore, vehicles 
not used in public places or public roads or not suitable for use on 
roads are outside the purview of the definition of “motor vehicles” and 
are not chargeable to road tax. Secondly, it has been submitted that 
the manufacturer’s specifications and the certificates of the experts on 
record clearly demonstrate that the vehicles in question are off-road 
vehicles. The certificates and contentions have not been refuted by 
the State and the Court has simply ignored them by saying that the 
expert certificates and manufacturer’s specifications are not material. 
18.	 It has also been contended that the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways (MoRTH) vide circular dated 13.07.2020 expressly states 
that such vehicles as used by the appellants are “off-road equipment” 
and they do not qualify to be “motor vehicles” which may require 
registration. 
19.	 Moreover, Bolani Ores Ltd. vs. State of Orissa3, squarely answers 
the question raised in these appeals wherein it has been held that 
3	
(1974) 2 SCC 777

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
473
Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat & Ors.
the phrase “adapted for use upon roads” means vehicles which are 
suitable for plying on the roads and as such, vehicles and equipment 
not meant to be used on-roads are beyond taxation. 
20.	 The aforesaid decision has been followed in Tarachand Logistic 
Solutions Limited vs. State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.4, wherein 
it has been held that vehicles operating within closed premises and 
vehicles which do not derive benefit from public road infrastructure, 
are not taxable. Merely because the vehicles in question have been 
registered under the Act, the appellants are not estopped from 
challenging its liability to pay road tax on the said vehicle.
21.	 The case laws relied upon by the State or the High Court in holding 
otherwise are distinguishable and are not applicable.
22.	 In response to the arguments advanced on behalf of appellants as 
aforesaid, Shri K. Parameshwar, senior counsel appearing for the 
State of Gujarat submits that Section 3 (1) of the Gujarat Tax Act is 
the charging provision and it uses the word “all motor vehicles” and, 
therefore, any vehicle which falls within the ambit of “motor vehicles”, 
whether meant for on-road or off-road use, is subject to payment of 
road tax. No distinction can be made between the vehicles on the 
basis of their use. The words “public place” or “public road” have 
not been used in Section 3 of the Gujarat Tax Act and are of no 
relevance. 
23.	 The circular of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) 
dated 13.07.2020 has not been issued in exercise of any rule making 
power under the Act. It is not relevant and is not binding as it cannot 
override the express provision of the statute. Moreover, the said 
circular operates prospectively and would not apply to the vehicles 
which have been purchased earlier. 
24.	 The decision of Tarachand Logistic (supra) relied upon on behalf 
of appellants is of no help, rather, the decisions rendered by this 
Court in Chief General Manager, Jagannath Area & Ors. vs. State 
of Orissa & Anr.5 and State of Gujarat & Ors. vs. Akhil Gujarat 
Pravasi V.S. Mahamandal6 & Ors., would prevail.
4	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1851
5	
(1996) 10 SCC 676
6	
(2004) 5 SCC 155

474
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
25.	 Before embarking upon the question of law i.e., whether heavy earth 
moving machinery or special service vehicle or any construction 
equipment vehicles are “motor vehicles” within the ambit of Section 
2 (28) of the Act and are chargeable to tax under the Gujarat Tax 
Act, it would be necessary for us to refer to certain provisions of 
the Constitution of India, then to the charging Section of the Gujarat 
Tax Act and then the definition of the “motor vehicle” as contained 
in the Act itself. 
26.	 Article 265 of the Constitution of India clearly provides that tax 
shall not be levied or collected except by the authority of law. If we 
read the above Article in consonance with Entry 57 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, it would be evident that taxes 
can be imposed on vehicles which impliedly include “motor vehicle” 
suitable for use on roads. 
27.	 Entry 57 of List II of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution reads 
as under:
“57. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or 
not, suitable for use on roads, including tram-cars subject 
to the provisions of Entry 35 of List III.”
28.	 Upon a conjoint reading of Article 265 and Entry 57 of List II of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, it is evident that the State is 
competent to levy and collect tax on vehicles i.e., motor vehicles if 
they are suitable for use on roads.
29.	 Section 3 of the Gujarat Tax Act provides for levying tax on motor 
vehicles. The relevant part of it stipulates as under:	
“ 3. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, on and 
from the 1st day of April 1958, there shall be levied and 
collected on all motor vehicles used or kept for use in the 
State, a tax at the rates fixed by the State Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, but not exceeding 
the maximum rates specified in the First, Second and 
Third Schedules:
Provided that in the case of any motor vehicle (irrespective 
of whether they are specified in the First Schedule 
or the Second Schedule or Third Schedule kept by a 
dealer in, or manufacturer of, such vehicles, for the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
475
Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat & Ors.
purpose of trade, there shall be levied and collected 
annually such amount of tax not exceeding Rs.5000 as 
the State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette specify on those motor vehicles only which 
are permitted to be used on the roads in the manner 
prescribed by rules made under the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988:……………………………………………………..”
30.	 The aforesaid charging Section contemplates to levy and collect 
tax on all motor vehicles either used or kept for use in the State. A 
plain reading of the aforesaid provision would reveal that tax can be 
levied and collected from all motor vehicles irrespective of the fact 
as to whether they are actually used or kept for use. 
31.	 It may be pertinent to note that Entry 57 of List II of the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution permits imposition of tax on vehicles 
suitable for use on roads. Section 3 of the Gujarat Tax Act authorizes 
levy and collection of tax on all motor vehicles used or kept for use 
in the State without specifying whether suitable for use on roads or 
not. It is on account of the conspicuous absence of the qualification 
“suitable for use on roads” in the Gujarat Tax Act that the vehicles 
used by the appellants which are said to be off-road vehicles are 
sought to be taxed. The Gujarat Tax Act cannot travel beyond Entry 
57 of List II of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India so as 
to tax vehicles which are not suitable for being used on roads. 
32.	 Now, the basic issue is: what is meant by “motor vehicle” or what 
are “motor vehicles”.
33.	 The phrase “motor vehicle” has not been defined under the Gujarat 
Tax Act rather sub-Section (10) of Section 2 of the said Act provides 
that words and expressions not defined under the said Act shall have 
the same meaning as assigned to them under the Act. 
34.	 Section 2 (10) is reproduced herein below:
“2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:-
……………………………………………………………..
(10) other words and expressions used, but not defined, 
in this Act, shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in the Motor Vehicles, 1988 or the rules made 
thereunder.”

476
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
35.	 In view of the above provision of Section 2 (10) of the Act as motor 
vehicle has not been defined under the Gujarat Tax Act, it has to be 
assigned the same meaning as is contained in the Act. 
36.	 The Act defines “motor vehicle” under Section 2 (28) of the Act. It 
reads as under:
“2. Definitions-In this Act, unless the context otherwise 
requires.-
……………………………………………………………..
(28) “motor vehicle” or “vehicle” means any mechanically 
propelled vehicle adapted for the use upon roads whether 
the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an 
external or internal source and includes a chassis to which 
a body has not been attached and a trailer; but does not 
include a vehicle running upon fixed rails or a vehicle of 
a special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any 
other enclosed premises or a vehicle having less than 
four wheels fitted with engine capacity or not exceeding 
twenty-five cubic centimeters;”
37.	 A simple and plain reading of the aforesaid provision would reveal 
that it is in two parts. The first part is inclusive and the second part 
is exclusive. The first part, in short, provides that a motor vehicle or 
a vehicle means any mechanically propelled vehicle which is adapted 
for use upon roads and includes the chassis to which a body has 
not been attached and a trailer. So, the above part of the definition 
of motor vehicle is inclusive in nature. The second part provides 
for the exclusion of certain vehicles from the definition of the motor 
vehicle. It provides that motor vehicle does not include a vehicle 
running upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted 
for use only in a factory or in any other enclosed premises. It 
means that the legislature has consciously provided for the exclusion 
of the vehicles of the special kind which have been adapted for use 
only in a factory or any other enclosed premises from the definition 
of motor vehicle. In other words, though the term motor vehicle is 
wide enough but it expressly excludes some of the motor vehicles 
which are of special type and have been adapted for use only in 
factory or in any other enclosed premises from its ambit. 
38.	 The vehicles in question used by the appellant are all in the nature 
of special vehicles as they are basically construction equipment 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
477
Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat & Ors.
vehicles which have been made suitable for use only in a factory and 
an enclosed premises rather than for use on roads. These vehicles 
may be capable of being used on road but essentially, they are meant 
to be used as a special vehicle inside the enclosed premises or in 
the factory premises alone and not outside on the road. Even for 
reaching the factory premises, or the so-called enclosed premises 
they do not ply on road and are taken on tractors and trailers from 
the place of their manufacturing to the place of their deployment. 
The various certificates of the manufacturers and suppliers as well 
as those issued by the Automotive Research Association of India 
amply demonstrate that the aforesaid vehicles used by the appellant 
are special type of vehicles meant for use only within the factory 
premises or the enclosed premise. They are all off-road vehicles that 
do not ordinarily ply on roads. Since, they do not run on the roads, 
the manufacturers and suppliers do not even issue any certificate of 
road worthiness in respect of these vehicles. In short, the vehicles 
used by the appellants are special type of vehicles meant to be used 
as construction equipment vehicle within the enclosed premises and 
as such ex-facie stands excluded from the definition of the motor 
vehicle as contained in Section 2 (28) of the Act, more particularly 
by virtue of the second part of the definition. 
39.	 In view of the above, we can safely conclude that though the 
vehicles used by the appellant are “motor vehicles” within the first 
part of the definition under Section 2 (28) of the Act but they stand 
excluded from the definition of “motor vehicles” on account of their 
very nature of use and the place of the use by virtue of the second 
part of the definition. 
40.	 There is another reason for excluding the above vehicles used by 
the appellant from the ambit of the motor vehicles. The Central 
Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 framed under the Act vide Rule 2 (cab) 
defines “construction equipment vehicle” to mean rubber tyred, rubber 
padded or steel drum wheel mounted, self-propelled, excavator, 
loader, backhoe, compactor roller, dumper, motor grader, mobile 
crane, dozer, fork lift truck, self-loaded concrete mixture or any other 
construction vehicle or combination thereof designed for off-highway 
operations in mining, industrial undertaking, irrigation and general 
construction, modified and manufactured with “on or off” or “on and 
off” highway capabilities. 

478
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
41.	 In the light of the aforesaid definition, the vehicles used by the 
appellant though manufactured or modified for “on or off” or “on and off” 
highway capabilities are essentially construction equipment vehicles 
of special kind and are not simplicitor motor vehicles falling within the 
ambit of Section 2 (28) of the Act. They as such are special type of 
vehicles falling in the category of “construction equipment vehicles”.
42.	 The charging Section i.e., Section 3 (1) of the Gujarat Tax Act itself 
provides that tax on all motor vehicles shall be levied and collected 
at the rate fixed by the State Government but not exceeding the 
maximum rate specified in the first, second and third Schedule of 
the Act. If we go to the first schedule to the Gujarat Tax Act, we find 
that against each type of motor vehicles maximum annual rate of tax 
has been specified. However, under Item (ii) of Item (f) under Item 
VI of the First Schedule, though we find mention of motor vehicles 
exceeding particular specification and/or any construction equipment 
vehicles but there is no corresponding rate of tax. If the aforesaid 
entry in the Schedule I is read, it would demonstrate that the Schedule 
prescribes no rate of tax on construction equipment vehicles i.e., 
the vehicles as used by the appellant. Therefore, it can again be 
concluded that the vehicles used by the appellants are special type 
of vehicles which stand excluded from the definition of motor vehicles 
and, at the same time, being construction equipment vehicles, are 
not chargeable to tax. The Gujarat Tax Act itself does not provide for 
any rate of tax for collection of any tax from such vehicles.
43.	 It is for the above reason that the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways (MoRTH) had issued circular dated 13.07.2020 to clarify 
that vehicles as used by the appellants i.e., vehicles of special type 
or those used in construction activity, if are not being run on roads, 
do not qualify to be motor vehicles and regular registration. The 
said circular may not override the express provisions of law but 
nonetheless, is binding upon the departmental authorities as has 
been held in K.P. Varghese vs. ITO7 .
44.	 On a composite reading of Section 3 of the Gujarat Tax Act, the 
definition of motor vehicles under Section 2 (28) of the Act, the 
definition of construction equipment vehicles contained in Rule 2 (cab) 
of the Rules and Schedule I of the Gujarat Tax Act, it is crystal clear 
7	
(1981) 4 SCC 173

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
479
Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat & Ors.
that the vehicles of the kind used by the appellant which are special 
vehicles i.e., construction equipment vehicles may be suitable for 
plying upon roads are essentially meant to be used in a factory or an 
enclosed premises and as such are not chargeable to tax under the 
Gujarat Tax Act. Even otherwise in view of the language employed in 
Entry 57 of List II of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, 
no authority is authorized to levy or collect tax on vehicles which are 
not suitable for use on roads and have been designed for off-road 
use in factory or enclosed premises. 
45.	 The view taken by us above finds full support from the three-Judge 
Bench decision of this Court Bolani Ores Ltd. vs. State of Orissa 
(supra). In the said case this Court was dealing with the definition 
of the motor vehicle as it existed in the Motor Vehicles Act of 1939 
in reference to Bihar and Orissa Motor Vehicles Taxation Act,1930. 
The “motor vehicle” was defined in Section 2(18) of the aforesaid 
Act which used the phrase “adapted for use upon roads”. In the 
light of the said definition, this Court considered whether dumpers, 
rockers and tractairs are taxable under the Bihar and Orissa Motor 
Vehicles Taxation Act, 1930. This Court while considering the 
meaning of the words “adapted for use” observed that they must be 
construed as “suitable for use or in other words fit for use on road”. 
This connotation was based upon Entry 57 of List II of the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution. It was held that in view of Entry 57 
of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, the power to 
impose tax on motor vehicles is regulatory and compensatory in 
nature and that the said power can be exercised to impose taxes on 
motor vehicles which use the roads in the State. This Court further 
observed that the vehicles such as dumpers, rockers and tractairs 
are though suitable for use on roads but in the light of the pleadings 
as they were used only within the enclosed premises specifically for 
the industrial purpose, they cannot be held liable for taxation. It was 
categorically held that if a vehicle does not use the public roads, it 
cannot be taxed. It was also observed that if a vehicle merely moves 
from one place to another, it need not necessarily be a motor vehicle. 
It also holds that vehicles though registered under the Act as motor 
vehicles need not be subjected to tax if otherwise those vehicles 
do not ply on roads.
46.	 The vehicles used by the appellant undeniably are not used on roads 
and are not even kept for use on roads. 

480
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
47.	 However, in the case of Natwar Parikh & Co. Ltd. vs. State of 
Karnataka & Ors.8 a three-Judge Bench of this Court without over 
ruling Bolani Ores Ltd. (supra) held that tractor-trailers used for 
transporting goods constitute a different category of “goods carriage” 
which requires permit under Section 66 of the Motor Vehicles Act. 
Therefore, in the absence of such a permit they are liable to tax under 
Section 3(2) of the Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1957.
48.	 The aforesaid decision in the case of Natwar Parikh & Co. Ltd. 
(supra) has simply held that the “goods carriage” requires a permit 
under the Motor Vehicles Act and therefore, they are “motor vehicles”. 
However, it failed to consider whether the vehicles in question which 
are allegedly special type vehicles or construction equipment vehicles 
specially designed to be used in factory premises or in the enclosed 
premises and not on the public roads would be covered by motor 
vehicles. Therefore, the above decision has no application to the 
facts and circumstances of the present case.
49.	 A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Western Coalfields Limited 
vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr.9 simply referring to the earlier 
decisions of this Court in Natwar Parikh & Co. Ltd. (supra) held 
that excavators fall within the meaning of the definition of “motor 
vehicles” as contained in Section 2 (28) of the Act and therefore, 
would be liable for registration and payment of taxes.
50.	 Since, the decision in the case of Western Coalfields Limited 
(supra) is based upon Natwar Parikh & Co. Ltd. (supra) in holding 
that excavators fall within the meaning of definition of “motor vehicles” 
as contained in Section 2 (28) of the Act and as such would be 
liable for registration and payment of tax but without going into the 
aspect whether such vehicles stands excluded from the definition of 
“motor vehicles” by virtue of second part of the definition contained 
under Section 2 (28) of the Act, it is of no use in the facts and 
circumstances of the case. 
51.	 The decisions to the contrary cited at the Bar starting from Travancore 
Tea Estates Co. Ltd vs. State of Kerala & Ors.10, Union of India 
8	
(2005) 7 SCC 364
9	
(2016) 11 SCC 613
10	
(1980) 3 SCC 619

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
481
Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat & Ors.
and Ors. vs. Chowgule and Co. Pvt. Ltd. & Ors.11, M/s Central 
Coal Fields Ltd. vs. State of Orissa & Ors.12, Chief General 
Manager, Jagannath Area & Ors. (supra), Bose Abraham vs. 
State of Kerala & Anr.13, State of Gujarat & Ors. (supra) are all 
decisions of the different Division Benches of this Court. No doubt, 
they hold that vehicles used or kept for use on the public roads of 
the State are exigible to tax, and if they are not so used they can 
claim exemption but all these decisions fail to take into account the 
specific exclusion as contained in the second part of Section 2 (28) of 
the Act which defines “motor vehicles”. As stated earlier, the vehicles 
or the construction equipment vehicles used by the appellants are 
“motor vehicles” within the first part of the definition as contained 
in Section 2 (28) but they stand excluded by virtue of the second 
part of the said definition. This aspect of the matter has not been 
specifically considered by any of the above decisions. Moreover, 
all these decisions simply brushes aside Bolani Ores Ltd. (supra) 
without actually ruling it out on the ground that it relates to “motor 
vehicles” as defined under the old Act without realising that there 
was no material change between the definition of “motor vehicles” 
in the old or present Act. 
52.	 If the principle laid down by the above decisions that vehicles either 
used or kept for use in the State irrespective of whether they are 
suitable for plying on roads or not or whether they are special type of 
vehicles meant to be used only in enclosed premises are subjected 
to tax is accepted, it will lead to an anomaly. It may be noted that 
aircrafts specially those belonging to Air Force are capable of landing 
on the highways and they can after taxing on the highway can also 
take-off from there, and as such would be vehicles suitable for use 
on roads which will make them motor vehicles liable for registration 
under the Act and payment of road tax within the ambit of various 
State Acts. Similar would be the case with the tanks belonging to 
Army inasmuch as they are also suitable to ply on roads if necessary 
and keeping them for use within any State would attract their 
registration as motor vehicles liable to payment of tax. This cannot 
be the intention of the legislature in prescribing the definition of the 
11	
(1992) Supp. 3 SCC 141
12	
(1992) Supp. 3 SCC 133
13	
(2001) 3 SCC 157

482
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
motor vehicles under the Act and to impose tax thereupon. In this 
view of the matter, the principle laid down by the above decisions 
cannot be accepted and applied in an absolute form on all motor 
vehicles ignoring the distinction between normal motor vehicles 
and the motor vehicles of special kind such as heavy construction 
equipment or special type of vehicles which are meant to be used 
within a specified area and not on public roads. 
53.	 One another decision in the case of Chairman, Rajasthan State 
Road Transport Corporation & Ors. vs. Santosh & Ors.14 was 
cited. The said decision deals with the motorised cart “Jugaad” and it 
was held that it is a “motor vehicle” within the definition of Section 2 
(28) of the Act and is exigible to road tax. The facts of the said case 
were quite distinct from the present case at hand in as much as in 
the said case the Court was only called upon to rule as to whether 
motorised cart “Jugaad” is a motor vehicle or not. The Court had 
not embarked upon to consider whether by virtue of its use it would 
stand excluded from the definition of the “motor vehicle”. Therefore, 
the aforesaid decision is also of no use in the present case. 
54.	 Contrary to the above, this Court recently in Tarachand Logistic 
Solutions Limited (supra) was called upon to decide whether the 
premises of Visakhapatnam Steel Plant, Andhra Pradesh, a corporate 
entity of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited (‘RINL’) where the alleged 
special type vehicles were exclusively used constitute a “public place”. 
This Court inter alia observed that if a motor vehicle is not used in a 
public place or is not kept for use in a public place and the person 
concerned is not deriving any benefit from the public infrastructure, 
he should not be burdened with the motor vehicle tax.
55.	 In view of the aforesaid discussion specially considering the pleadings 
and the material on record, we are of the conclusive opinion that 
the vehicles used by the appellants are vehicles of special types, 
precisely construction equipment vehicles which are suitable and 
are meant for use for operation and use within the industrial area/
factory premises/ defined enclosed premises and are not meant for 
use on roads or public roads. They are off-road equipments and as 
such stand excluded not only from the purview of the “motor vehicle” 
as defined under Section 2 (28) of the Act but also from tax as 
14	
(2013) 7 SCC 94

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
483
Ultratech Cement Ltd. v. The State of Gujarat & Ors.
Entry 57 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution only 
authorizes taxation of vehicles suitable for use on roads only. They 
are not even chargeable to road tax in view of Schedule I to Section 
3 (1) of the Gujarat Tax Act which do not prescribes any tax for such 
kind of vehicles i.e., construction equipment vehicles. However, if 
any such kind of vehicles are found using roads, they would not be 
free from the rigors of Section 2 (28) of the Act and Section 3 of the 
Gujarat Tax Act and may also be subject to proceedings for seizure 
and penalty in accordance with the law.
56.	 Accordingly, the impugned judgments and orders dated 15.07.2011 
and 19.12.2012 passed by the High Court of Gujarat are set aside 
and the appeals are allowed with no order as to cost. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
