[2026] 1 S.C.R. 372 : 2026 INSC 26
Divjot Sekhon 
v. 
State of Punjab and Others
(Civil Appeal No. 67 of 2026)
06 January 2026
[Sanjay Kumar* and Alok Aradhe, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
As regards admission to MBBS/BDS courses under sports quota, 
the issue arose as to whether the procedure of keeping the 
admission process elastic after issuance of the prospectus and 
submission of applications by the candidates with their sports 
achievements would be valid in the eye of law.
Headnotes†
Education/Educational Institution – Admission to MBBS/
BDS courses through NEET-UG under sports quota during 
session-2024 – Change in policy w.r.t the zone of consideration 
midstream during the admission process – Impermissibility – 
Prospectus for admission to the colleges in Punjab in 
undergraduate medical courses, including MBBS/BDS courses, 
during session-2024 was released by the University providing 
that credit would be given only for sports achievements during 
Classes XI and XII – However, later the impugned email and 
an Addendum affirming it was issued asking the candidates to 
submit their sports certificates in relation to their achievements 
during any class/year instead of just Classes XI and XII – In 
the merit list, respondent Nos.4 (‘KK’) and 5 were placed 
higher than the appellants on the strength of their sports 
achievements in Classes IX and X – Writ petitions filed by 
appellants, dismissed by High Court – Challenge to:
Held: Rules of the game cannot be altered once the game has 
begun – Just as modification of recruitment norms is forbidden in 
law after the recruitment process has begun, it is equally illegal 
for an admission process to not be fully defined in all its contours 
* Author

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
373
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
before its commencement, so as to leave room for the authorities 
to stipulate norms later on to suit their own interests or to permit 
nepotism – The transparency of such a process is paramount to 
ensure fairness and prevent arbitrariness – The admission process 
to MBBS/BDS courses during session-2024, by altering the zone 
of consideration for sports quota at the behest of one ‘RKK’, a 
Roller-Skating Coach was vitiated as he failed to disclose that 
his recommendation benefitted his own daughter ‘KK’-respondent 
No.4 – Further, when the State specifically noted in its Corrigendum 
in 2023 that enlargement of the zone of consideration to include 
Classes IX and X was only for session-2023 in view of the pandemic, 
the departure from the policy of limiting consideration to only sports 
achievements during Classes XI and XII, which was the policy 
obtaining prior thereto, ought not to have been effected midstream 
after applications were submitted by the candidates along with 
their sports achievements – State and its instrumentalities have 
a duty and responsibility to act fairly and reasonably in terms of 
the mandate of Art.14 – Any decision taken by the State must be 
reasoned and not arbitrary – Procedure followed by the State of 
Punjab in leaving the norms elastic, without disclosing as to what 
would be the exact policy w.r.t the zone of consideration, and 
allowing itself sufficient leeway to change such policy midstream 
during the admission process is not fair, transparent and enables 
arbitrariness and nepotism – Modification in the policy quashed – 
Appellants to be accommodated in the seats in the government 
medical college(s) allotted to respondent Nos.4 and 5, who in turn 
shall be given the seats vacated by the Appellants in the private 
medical college – Constitution of India – Art.14. [Paras 18, 21, 33, 
35, 38]
Education/Educational Institution – Admission to MBBS/
BDS courses through NEET UG under sports quota during 
session-2025 – Change in policy w.r.t the zone of consideration 
midstream during the admission process – Such modification 
of the policy during session-2024 was continued during 
session-2025 – Challenge to:
Held: Modification of the policy during session-2024 was vitiated – 
Continuation of that policy during session-2025 with nothing further 
would also be open to challenge on the same ground – However, 
since admissions have already been made for session-2025 and 

374
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
no candidate who would be adversely affected by interference 
therewith was made a party to this litigation – Therefore, this lis 
cannot be given a quietus at this stage – These appellants are 
granted liberty to approach the High Court once again by way of 
a properly constituted proceeding, impleading all the proper and 
necessary parties thereto, and seek appropriate relief. [Para 42]
Judicial Review – Policy decision – Plea of the State of Punjab 
that the Court would, ordinarily, not interfere in policy matters:
Held: Not accepted – When a policy decision is riddled with 
arbitrariness or even provides avenues therefor, the Court would 
be justified in nullifying it – The fact that a policymaker is to be 
allowed some elbow room in formulating policy does not translate 
to allowing scope for arbitrariness or nepotism. [Para 37]
Internal notings – Relevance – Change in policy formulated 
by the State examined through file notings reflecting how the 
decision-making process progressed from stage to stage:
Held: In the present case, the notings in the file disclosing the role 
played by one ‘RKK’, are utmost relevant and cannot be ignored 
as his intervention in the matter was what actually prompted the 
policy change that was brought about thereafter. [Para 34]
Case Law Cited
Tej Prakash Pathak and others v. Rajasthan High Court and 
Others, [2024] 12 SCR 28 : (2025) 2 SCC 1; Sivanandan C.T. 
and Others v. High Court of Kerala and Others [2023] 11 SCR 
674 : (2024) 3 SCC 799 – followed.
Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation and Others v. 
Rajendra Bhimrao Mandve and Others (2001) 10 SCC 51; K. 
Manjusree v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Another [2008] 2 SCR 
1025 : (2008) 3 SCC 512; Mandeep Singh and Others v. State 
of Punjab and Others, 2025 INSC 834 [2025] 8 SCR 34 : 2025 
SCC Online SC 1420 – relied on.
Harinagar Sugar Mills Limited (Biscuit Division) and Another v. State 
of Maharashtra and Other [2025] 7 SCR 427 : (2025) 10 SCC 
286; Pimpri Chinchwad New Township Development Authority v. 
Vishnudev Cooperative Housing Society and Others [2018] 11 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
375
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
SCR 310 : (2018) 8 SCC 215 – referred to.
Ibadat Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others, Decision of the High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana dtd. 20.02.2025 in CWP No. 18657 
of 2023 (O&M) – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Admission to MBBS/BDS courses under sports quota; National 
Eligibility cum Entrance Test (Undergraduate) (NEET UG-2024); 
NEET UG-2025; Rules of the game cannot be altered once the 
game has begun; Change in policy midstream during the admission 
process; Arbitrariness; Nepotism; Favouritism; Revised Prospectus; 
Addendum; Fairness; Rules of game; Policy change; Altering 
zone of consideration; Zone of consideration; Admission process 
elastic; Admission norms elastic; Admission policy; Policy decision; 
Criteria for selection cannot be altered in the middle or after the 
process of selection has commenced; Transparency in admission 
process; Admission processes to educational courses; Sports merit 
list; Sports achievements; Sports certificates; Admission criteria; 
Internal notings; Internal notings in official files of Government; 
Sports policy, 2023; Sports policy, 2018; Double standards; Unlawful 
benefit; Illegal benefit.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 67 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.09.2024 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in CWP No. 21051 of 2024.
With
Civil Appeal No(s). 68 and 69 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Misha Rohatgi, Suneet Pal Singh Aulakh, Nakul Mohta, Ayush 
Kashyap, Amulya Upadhyay, Ms. Jyoti Mendiratta, B.K. Satija.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Siddhant Sharma, Vikram Choudhary, G.K. Bansal, Nitin Kaushal, 

376
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Manoj Pandey, Anuj Tyagi, Ms. Shreelekha Vyas, Ms. Tanya 
Swarup.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Kumar, J
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
These appeals arise out of separate orders passed by the High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh dismissing the writ 
petitions filed by the appellants. The first of the appeals pertains to 
Divjot Sekhon. Her writ petition in CWP-21051-2024 was dismissed 
by a Division Bench of the High Court on 11.09.2024. Her prayer 
therein was to quash the email dated 16.08.2024 sent by Baba 
Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot1, whereby candidates 
applying for admission to MBBS/BDS courses under sports quota in 
session-2024 were asked to submit their certificates/achievements of 
any class/year instead of just Classes XI and XII. She also challenged 
the merit list dated 23.08.2024 of candidates admitted to MBBS/
BDS courses under sports quota, that placed Kudrat Kashyap and 
Mansirat Kaur, respondent Nos. 4 and 5, at high positions therein 
on the strength of their sports achievements in Classes IX and X.
3.	
The next appeal is of Shubhkarman Singh, another MBBS aspirant 
under sports quota during session-2024. On 12.09.2024, the same 
Division Bench dismissed his writ petition in CWP-23083-2024, 
following its decision in Divjot Sekhon’s case, a day earlier. His prayer 
was on the same lines as Divjot Sekhon’s. In addition thereto, he 
assailed the Addendum dated 03.09.2024, whereby the University 
informed all National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (Undergraduate) 
[NEET UG-2024] aspirants who applied under sports quota that 
sports achievements during Classes XI and XII was misprinted in 
the Prospectus and that they were told via email dated 16.08.2024 
to submit all their sports achievements during any class/year/session 
in person on 19.08.2024 (upto 3 PM). 
1	
For short, ‘the University’

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
377
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
4.	
The email dated 16.08.2024, issued by the Admission Branch of the 
University, was addressed to all the candidates who had applied 
under sports quota and they were informed that, as per Punjab 
Government’s Notification for admission to MBBS/BDS courses 
under NEET UG-2024, the clause pertaining to sports category read: 
‘Credit and admission shall be made on the basis of inter-se merit 
determined on the basis of gradation (Category A/B/C) as per sports 
policy notified by Department of Sports & Youth Services, Government 
of Punjab’. The candidates were told that, as per the above clause, 
it was not compulsory to submit only sports achievements of 10+1 
& 10+2 Classes and they were supposed to submit all their sports 
achievements made during any class/year. They were told that if 
they wanted to submit any more documents in support of their claim 
under sports category, which they had not submitted earlier, they 
could submit the same in person on 19.08.2024 upto 3 PM. Thus, 
the addendum dated 03.09.2024, issued post facto, was only an 
affirmation of the email dated 16.08.2024. 
5.	
The last appeal pertains to Agrima Mann, Gauranshi Dhingra and 
Navreet Singh, aspirants for admission to MBBS/BDS courses under 
sports quota for the next year, i.e., during session-2025. They filed 
CWP-19735-2025 assailing Clauses 15(v) and 16(v) of the Notification 
dated 09.08.2024, published on 17.06.2025, for admission to MBBS/
BDS courses through NEET UG-2025. The impugned clauses related 
to 1% reservation of seats under sports quota, whereby credit was 
sought to be given to sports achievements during any academic 
year without restriction. Their prayer was that the benefit should 
be restricted to the achievements in Classes XI and XII only and 
that there was no justification in perpetuating the criteria that was 
adopted during Covid-19 pandemic. They sought a direction to the 
authorities to restore the policy decision/ criteria which existed prior 
to session-2023 in respect of admissions to MBBS/BDS courses 
for session-2025. In the alternative, they sought a direction to the 
authorities to implement the changed policy decision/ criteria in a 
staggered manner so as to not take the existing aspirants by surprise. 
This writ petition was dismissed by a Division Bench of the High 
Court on 16.07.2025, but there was no independent application of 
mind as the Bench merely followed the decision rendered in Divjot 
Sekhon’s case by the coordinate Bench, presided over by the same 
learned Judge. 

378
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
6.	
We will first deal with the cases of Divjot Sekhon and Shubhkarman 
Singh as they relate to MBBS/BDS admissions during session-2024. 
The Prospectus for admission to the colleges in Punjab in 
undergraduate medical courses, including MBBS/BDS courses, 
during session-2024 was released by the University on 09.08.2024. 
It specifically provided that credit would be given only for sports 
achievements during Classes XI and XII. Admissions were to be made 
on the basis of inter-se merit of candidates determined on the basis 
of gradation (Category A/B/C). While so, the Government of Punjab 
issued Notification dated 09.08.2024, outlining the admission criteria to 
MBBS/BDS courses for session-2024. The notification was, however, 
silent about the classes/years which would be considered under 
sports quota for assessing sports achievements of the candidates. 
A revised Prospectus was issued by the University on 10.08.2024, 
wherein the stipulation about considering sports achievements during 
Classes XI and XII was retained. Applications for admission under 
sports quota along with relevant documents were to be submitted by 
16.08.2024. The checklist provided to aid the process of submission 
of documents stated as follows: -
‘4. Gradation Certificate of Category (A/B/C) issued by 
the Director Sports Punjab for Sports Achievements made 
during 10+1 (passing year______) & 10+2 (passing year 
______)
5. Sports Certificate played during 10+1 (passing year 
______) & 10+2 (passing year_____)’
7.	
While so, on 16.08.2024 at 6:07 pm, the impugned email was issued 
to all the candidates who had applied under sports quota for admission 
to MBBS/BDS courses. Thereby, the University asked them to submit 
their sports certificates in relation to their achievements during any 
class/year. Divjot Sekhon is a Roller Skater/Inline Hockey player. 
Shubhkarman Singh plays Baseball. They appeared for NEET UG-
2024 on 05.05.2024. The results of NEET UG-2024 were declared 
on 26.07.2024. Thereafter, the merit list of eligible candidates under 
sports quota was released by the Director of Sports, Punjab, on 
23.08.2024. This merit list was drawn up by considering candidates’ 
sports achievements during Classes IX and X also. On the strength 
of their achievements during Classes IX and X, Kudrat Kashyap, 
respondent No. 4, a Roller Skater/Inline Hockey player, stood at 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
379
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
rank No. 1, while Mansirat Kaur, respondent No. 5, another Roller 
Skater, stood at rank No. 5. Divjot Sekhon was shown at rank No. 
8 while Shubhkarman Singh was at rank No.9 therein. Basing on 
these ranks, Divjot Sekhon and Shubhkarman Singh were admitted 
to MBBS course in Gian Sagar Medical College, Banur, a private 
medical college. 
8.	
According to the appellants, only for session-2023, the sports merit 
list was prepared on the basis of the sports achievements not only 
during Classes XI and XII but also Classes IX and X, owing to the 
Covid-19 pandemic that held sway from 2020 to 2022. Earlier, only 
the sports achievements of candidates during Classes XI and XII 
were being taken into consideration. They pointed out that even for 
session-2024, the Prospectus initially released by the University 
stated that only the sports achievements during Classes XI and XII 
would be considered. But, thereafter, the State and the University 
did a volte-face and took into account the sports achievements of 
candidates during Classes IX and X also. They challenged this action 
on their part alleging that the admission process had been changed 
after its commencement. 
9.	
In its reply filed before the High Court, the University stated that it 
had specifically mentioned in the prospectus issued on 09.08.2024 
that the notification for admission to MBBS/BDS courses during 
session-2024 was still awaited but, keeping in view the schedule 
issued by the Medical Counselling Committee/Government of India, 
applications had been invited on urgent basis, but eligibility for 
admission to MBBS/BDS courses under NEET UG-2024 would be 
subject to issuance of the notification by the Department of Medical 
Education and Research, Government of Punjab. The University 
published advertisements in the newspapers indicating the last date 
for depositing registration fee through the online payment gateway as 
16.08.2024. As per the University, the advertisements also indicated 
that any notification/update issued by the Medical Counselling 
Committee/Government of India/Government of Punjab regarding 
NEET UG-2024 would be applicable. 
10.	 Thereafter, the Department of Medical Education and Research, 
Government of Punjab, issued Notification dated 09.08.2024 and, 
accordingly, the revised prospectus, including the notification, was 
published on 10.08.2024. This prospectus superseded the instructions 

380
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
issued earlier. Clause 15 of this prospectus pertained to reservation 
in government medical/dental colleges while Clause 16 pertained to 
private institutes/universities. Sports reservation was indicated as 
1% in both categories. Clauses 15 and 16 stipulated that credit and 
admission shall be on the basis of inter-se merit of the candidates 
determined on the basis of gradation (Category A/B/C), as per the 
sports policy notified by the Department of Sports and Youth Services, 
Government of Punjab. 
11.	 The University stated that, in all, 5721 candidates applied for 
admission through NEET UG-2024, of whom 58 candidates had 
applied under sports quota and submitted their Sports Gradation 
Certificates, along with other credentials/documents, on 16.08.2024. 
According to the University, page 18 of the NEET UG-2024 Prospectus 
issued by it regarding sports persons wrongly indicated that sports 
achievements during Classes XI and XII only would be considered 
and it, therefore, sent an email to all the aspirants on 16.08.2024 
at 6.07 pm, clarifying that all candidates should submit their sports 
achievements during any class/year by 3 pm on 19.08.2024. All 
such documents submitted by aspirants till 3 pm on 19.08.2024 were 
forwarded by the University to the Director of Sports, Punjab, under 
letter dated 20.08.2024. Pursuant thereto, the Director of Sports, 
Punjab, issued the sports merit list dated 23.08.2024 and the same 
was published by the University on its website on the very same day. 
The University claimed that it was only a nodal agency which was 
bound to follow the instructions issued by the Department of Medical 
Education and Research, Government of Punjab, as sports policy 
was within the exclusive domain of the Director of Sports, Punjab. 
The University filed a reply before this Court on the same lines.
12.	 The State of Punjab also filed a reply before us. Therein, while 
reiterating what it had stated in its reply before the High Court, the 
State sought to place reliance on the decision of the High Court of 
Punjab and Haryana in Ibadat Sekhon vs. State of Punjab and 
others2 in relation to the sports quota during session-2023. Notably, 
the said decision turned upon the Corrigendum dated 01.08.2023 
issued by the State of Punjab. Clauses 15(v) and 16(v) in the earlier 
Notification dated 10.03.2023, pertaining to government medical/
2	
CWP No. 18657 of 2023 (O&M), decided on 20.02.2025

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
381
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
dental colleges and private institutes/ universities, provided that credit 
would be given only for sports achievements during Classes XI and 
XII. This was modified by the Corrigendum dated 01.08.2023 whereby 
the zone of consideration was expanded to include Classes IX and 
X also. The Corrigendum dated 01.08.2023 read thus: -
“In partial modification of the Notification No. 5/5/2021-
5HB3/446 dated 10.03.2023, para 15(v) and 16(v) are 
amended as under only for the session 2023:
“Credit shall be given for the sport achievements made 
during session 2019-20 to 2022-23. The admission shall 
be made on the basis of inter-se merit of the candidates 
determined on the basis of gradation (Category A/B/C) 
issued by the Director of Sports, Punjab. However, for 
exempted categories under para 11 of the Notification, the 
competent authority will be Director, Sport of that state or 
U.T., from where the candidate has passed his class XI 
and XII examinations.”
Note: This corrigendum is for this session only, in the 
light of the special circumstances prevailed during the 
COVID-19 pandemic.”
The corrigendum, therefore, made it clear that the modification was 
only for that session, i.e., session-2023, and it was owing to the 
special circumstances brought about by the Covid-19 pandemic. It is 
in this backdrop that the High Court dismissed Ibadat Sekhon’s writ 
petition. However, adoption and perpetuation of the same modified 
policy, which was categorically stated to be an exception, during the 
later session-2024 and thereafter did not flow from the Corrigendum 
dated 01.08.2023. 
13.	 Pertinently, the prospectus issued earlier by the University for 
session-2024 contained a list of categories and category codes 
and insofar as sports persons under Category Code No. 17 were 
concerned, it stated that credit would be given only for sports 
achievements during Classes XI and XII. However, in the general 
instructions in Part A, under Clause 14, it was stated that in case 
of any discrepancy or contradiction between the Government’s 
notifications and the University’s instructions contained in the said 
prospectus, the letter and spirit of the notifications shall prevail 

382
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
but in academic matters, the University shall be the final authority. 
Further, in the Schedule for admission through NEET UG-2024, it 
was specifically stated in Note#1 that any subsequent notification/
notice/amendments/corrigenda issued by the Government of Punjab/
University would be followed in letter and spirit and the candidates 
were required to visit the University website regularly for any updates. 
14.	 We may note that even in the Notification dated 09.08.2024 issued 
by the Department of Medical Education and Research, Government 
of Punjab, except for quantifying the reservation for sports persons 
at 1%, the issue as to how such reservation was to be implemented 
was not spelt out and it was merely stated that admission under this 
quota would be made on the basis of inter se merit of candidates 
determined on the basis of gradation (Category A/B/C) as per the 
sports policy notified by the Department of Sports and Youth Services, 
Government of Punjab. This was in relation to both government 
medical/dental colleges as well as private institutes/universities. 
15.	 The Department of Sports and Youth Services, Government of 
Punjab, brought out the Sports Policy, 2023, vide Notification dated 
31.07.2023. This was in supersession of the Sports Policy, 2018. 
Though the Sports Policy, 2023, envisioned encouraging all citizens to 
adopt an active life style; motivate children to come to play/run; and 
to restore Punjab’s glory in sports at national and international levels, 
and promised eight actionable points, including putting sports on a 
high pedestal through rewards and job opportunities for outstanding 
sports persons, it left certain issues unanswered. More specifically, 
it did not elaborate on the zone of consideration for assessment 
of sports achievements for conferment of benefits. Rule 4.2 of the 
said policy, however, specifically stated that a sub-junior tournament 
would be ineligible while grading sporting achievements. When the 
policy specifically excluded sub-junior tournaments, the University’s 
email dated 16.08.2024 requiring the candidates to submit their 
sports achievements during any class/year defies comprehension. 
Significantly, the University did not limit its expansion thereby to 
only Classes IX and X but required candidates to submit even their 
sub-junior achievements, if any, which was contrary to the State’s 
sports policy. Needless to state, there had to be clarity in that regard 
as leaving the issue open to be decided at a later point of time on 
a case-to-case or course-to-course basis would invariably introduce 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
383
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
arbitrariness and let in the scope for favouritism. 
16.	 The Sports Policy, 2023, did not indicate the classes/years that would 
be taken into consideration for assessing the competing merit of 
candidates under sports quota, i.e., the classes or years that would 
be treated as relevant for assessing their sports achievements during 
that period. Rule 5.1 of the Sports Policy, 2023, merely specified 
how inter se merit under sports quota was to be decided amongst 
winners, runners up and third position holders. Therefore, when 
there was no change in the basic sports policy and the prospectus 
for session-2024, in accordance therewith, mentioned that only 
Classes XI and XII would be considered for assessment of sports 
achievements, the State of Punjab cannot fall back on the procedure 
followed for session-2023 to justify the change that it brought about 
by again including Classes IX and X within the zone of consideration, 
contrary to its own Corrigendum dated 01.08.2023.
17.	 That said, the case law relied upon by the appellants about the 
binding nature and legal status of a prospectus is not relevant to this 
adjudication as the prospectus issued by the University contained the 
caveat that the notifications issued thereafter by the Government of 
Punjab would be binding. The larger question, however, is whether 
this procedure of keeping the admission process elastic after issuance 
of the prospectus and submission of applications by the candidates 
would be valid in the eye of law. This question arises in the backdrop 
of the necessity to maintain complete transparency in the admission 
process so as to obviate any possibility of arbitrariness or nepotism 
creeping in at a later stage, i.e., after submission of applications 
and sports achievements by candidates for admission to MBBS/
BDS courses under sports quota. 
18.	 It is well-settled that the rules of the game cannot be altered once 
the game has begun. In  Maharashtra State Road Transport 
Corporation and others  vs.  Rajendra Bhimrao Mandve and 
others3, this Court observed that “the rules of the game, meaning 
thereby, that the criteria for selection cannot be altered by the 
authorities concerned in the middle or after the process of selection 
has commenced”. The same principle was followed subsequently by 
a 3-Judge Bench in K. Manjusree vs. State of Andhra Pradesh 
3	
(2001) 10 SCC 51

384
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and another4 and by a Constitution Bench in Tej Prakash Pathak 
and others vs. Rajasthan High Court and others5. This principle 
is just as applicable to admission processes to educational courses 
as it would be to recruitment processes. Just as modification of 
recruitment norms is forbidden in law after the recruitment process 
has begun, it is equally illegal for an admission process to not be fully 
defined in all its contours before its commencement, so as to leave 
room for the authorities concerned to stipulate norms later on to suit 
their own interests or to permit nepotism. The transparency of such 
a process is paramount to ensure fairness and prevent arbitrariness. 
19.	 Significantly, for Bachelor of Physiotherapy course, Bachelor of 
Medical Laboratory Technology course and BSc course in Anatomy, 
Physiology & Biochemistry offered by the University during the very 
same session-2024, the Director of Sports, Punjab, instructed the 
University, vide letter dated 08.07.2024, that as per Rule 5.1 of the 
revised Sports Policy, 2023, only the sports achievements of Classes 
XI and XII were to be considered while preparing the sports merit 
list for those courses. There is no explanation forthcoming from the 
authorities as to why these double standards had been adopted.
20.	 It was in this context that this Court directed the State of Punjab 
to produce all the relevant material to examine how the matter 
progressed from stage to stage. Thereupon, the original files pertaining 
to this issue were placed before us. Perusal thereof reflected that 
one Ramesh Kumar Kashyap, a Roller-Skating Coach, who is none 
other than the father of Kudrat Kashyap, respondent No.4, had 
submitted a representation requesting that, in the admission process 
for MBBS/BDS courses in educational institutions in the State of 
Punjab, the sports achievements during Classes IX and X should 
also be included. Significantly, while making this recommendation, 
citing various reasons, Ramesh Kumar Kashyap failed to mention 
that his daughter, Kudrat Kashyap, would herself be benefited by 
this change. 
21.	 According to the undated representation made by Ramesh Kumar 
Kashyap, if a student wins a medal or participates in international 
competitions in Classes IX and X, he/she might not get another 
4	
(2008) 3 SCC 512
5	
(2025) 2 SCC 1

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
385
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
opportunity in Classes XI and XII, since such events are conducted 
once in every four years and by the time the next event occurs, 
the student would have already passed Class XII. He further stated 
that if a student, who achieved medals at the national/international 
level in Class IX or X is injured during Class XI or XII and cannot 
participate further, his/her earlier achievements would be ignored 
during MBBS/BDS admissions. According to him, students who pursue 
sports seriously until Class X often lag behind in academics and if 
they continue sports at the same intensity during Classes XI and 
XII, they might fail to qualify for the NEET examination. He further 
stated that many students who secure sports medals in Classes XI 
and XII, usually participate in obscure or lower level competitions, 
and often such students have never been active in sports prior to 
Class XI and manage achievements in later years using influence, 
thereby disadvantaging genuine athletes. He asserted that a true 
athlete’s capability should be judged based on their performance over 
the past four years and doing so would cause no disadvantage to 
anyone. He pointed out that even during the previous year, sports 
achievements from Classes IX, X, XI and XII were considered. He, 
accordingly, recommended that it would be appropriate that sports 
achievements of Classes IX and X also be considered along with 
Classes XI and XII from the academic year 2024-2025 onwards. 
22.	 Having stated so much about the rationale behind his recommendation, 
it was incumbent upon Ramesh Kumar Kashyap, had he been acting 
bonafide on behalf of all sportspersons and if his only aim was to 
secure their interest, to have also mentioned the fact that his daughter, 
Kudrat Kashyap, had participated in international events earlier and 
by inclusion of Classes IX and X within the zone of consideration, 
she would be hugely benefited as she was appearing for NEET UG-
2024. The facts manifest that she was, in fact, so benefited as she 
was ranked at No. 1 in the merit list dated 23.08.2024. This lack of 
probity on the part of Ramesh Kumar Kashyap, so as to benefit his 
own daughter, and his influencing of the authorities without disclosing 
this fact, so as to bring about a change in the policy contrary to what 
was stated in the Corrigendum dated 01.08.2023, is sufficient in itself 
to vitiate the modification that was brought about during session-2024 
to the detriment of other candidates under sports quota, including 
Divjot Sekhon and Shubhkarman Singh. 
23.	 The fact that these modified parameters were not extended to 

386
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
other medical and allied courses offered by the University during 
session-2024 clearly underlines the arbitrariness that crept in only in 
relation to admissions to MBBS/BDS courses. Be it noted that, during 
session-2024, only Classes XI and XII were taken into consideration 
for assessment of sports achievements for admission to Bachelor 
of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery course (BAMS), Bachelor of 
Homeopathic Medicine and Surgery course (BHMS) and Bachelor 
of Unani Medicine and Surgery course (BUMS). Even thereafter, 
during session-2025, only Classes XI and XII were taken into 
consideration for assessment of sports achievements for admission 
to BSc (Nursing) and Bachelor of Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry, in addition to the aforestated courses. 
24.	 In this regard, we may also note that the prospectus issued by the 
University for session-2024 in respect of post-graduate medical/dental 
courses, wherein sports persons were provided 2% reservation, 
specifically stated that credit would be given only for the sports 
achievements during MBBS/BDS courses only. The logic behind 
such a prescription is not far to gather, as achievements during the 
period immediately preceding admission to the course in question 
would be of relevance and not some achievements in the distant past. 
This is more so in the case of admission to MBBS/BDS courses, as 
a student aspiring for admission to such courses has to obtain not 
only adequate academic ranking but also secure sports achievements 
during that period. He/she would be entitled to the benefit of such 
reservation, having balanced both effectively, so as to stand in a 
sufficiently high position in the merit list. 
25.	 According to Divjot Sekhon, she would have ranked at No. 6 in the 
merit list if the authorities had considered only the sports achievements 
during Classes XI and XII and she would have secured a seat in 
a government medical college at much lesser financial cost. She 
pointed out that the fees to be paid by her in the private medical 
college was over ₹22 lakh for the entire 5-year course whereas she 
would have only incurred expenditure of ₹9.5 lakh in a government 
medical college. Reference was made to the procedure followed for 
admission to MBBS/ BDS courses during session-2019; session-2021; 
and session-2022, wherein only Classes XI and XII were the zone 
of consideration for assessment of sports achievements. As already 
noted hereinbefore, insofar as session-2023 was concerned, the 
norm was modified only for that particular session in the light of 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
387
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
Covid-19 pandemic, by expanding the zone of consideration to 
include Classes IX and X also. However, it appears that Ramesh 
Kumar Kashyap, who is stated to have trained Divjot Sekhon also, 
seems to have struck upon the idea that perpetuating the same would 
benefit his daughter and he, accordingly, made a recommendation 
to the authorities without disclosing his own private interest. This is 
clear and manifest from the files placed before us, which set out in 
detail the recommendation made by him and how it finally weighed 
with the authorities concerned.
26.	 Kudrat Kashyap, respondent No.4, filed replies in both the appeals. 
Therein, she adverted to her sports achievements, including her 
participation in an event at the international level. However, no 
mention was made of how her father, Ramesh Kumar Kashyap, 
went about securing a change in the policy which had prevailed till 
session-2023 and was modified only for that session, in the context 
of the Covid-19 pandemic, so as to benefit her. 
27.	 Mansirat Kaur, respondent No.5, also filed her replies stating that 
no relief had been claimed against her and that she was impleaded 
unnecessarily. However, if we set aside the modification to the zone 
of consideration, i.e., its enlargement from Classes XI and XII to 
include Classes IX and X also, she would be adversely affected. 
She cannot, therefore, state that she is not a proper and necessary 
party to this litigation and that her name should be deleted from the 
memo of parties.
28.	 Acting upon Ramesh Kumar Kashyap’s representation, the Director of 
Sports, Punjab, vide letter dated 18.10.2023, made these comments: - 
“With reference to the comments sought in the subject 
matter, it is stated that the Department always takes 
initiative for the welfare of sports persons. Therefore, in 
view of the representation submitted by the applicant, 
consideration may be given to providing 3% reservation 
for sports persons in admissions to medical education, so 
that maximum players can avail the benefit. Further, for 
example, if a sports person wins a medal at the national/
international level at an early age, i.e., in Class 9th or 10th, 
such a player brings laurels to the state and the country at 
a young age. However, due to the existing rules, he/she is 

388
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
unable to avail the benefit of the sports quota at the time 
of admission. Along with sports, maintaining education is 
also essential. As per the existing practice, Baba Farid 
University of Health Sciences, Faridkot, considers sports 
achievements of Classes 11th and 12th for MBBS/BDS 
admissions. The Department of Medical Education and 
Research, while issuing the notifications for the year 2023-
24, had directed that sports achievements of Classes 9th, 
10th, 11th and 12th be considered for that year. Therefore, it 
is recommended that, in the future as well, on a permanent 
basis, sports achievements obtained during Classes 9th, 
10th, 11th and 12th be considered for admission to MBBS/
BDS courses.”
29.	 In that context, the view of the Sports Department, vide Note #15 
dated 02.11.2023, warrants extraction in its entirety. It reads as follows:
“Further, for example, if a sports person wins a medal at 
the national/international level at an early age, i.e., in Class 
9th or 10th, such a player brings laurels to the state and 
country at a young age. However, due to the existing rules, 
he/she is unable to avail the benefit of the sports quota 
at the time of admission. Along with sports, maintaining 
education is also essential. As per the existing practice, 
Baba Farid University of Health Sciences, Faridkot, 
considers sports achievements of Classes 11th and 12th 
for MBBS/BDS admissions. The Department of Medical 
Education and Research, while issuing the notification for 
the year 2023-24, had directed that sports achievements 
of Classes 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th be considered for that 
year. Therefore, it is recommended that, in the future as 
well, on a permanent basis, sports achievements obtained 
during Classes 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th be considered for 
admission to MBBS/BDS courses.”
The above Note failed to take into account the fact that the modification 
during session-2023 was limited to that academic session only, in 
terms of the Corrigendum dated 01.08.2023, and the reason therefor 
was stated to be the Covid-19 pandemic. Those crucial aspects were 
completely overlooked by the Sports Department while endorsing the 
recommendation made by Ramesh Kumar Kashyap. The contrary 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
389
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
endorsement at Note #50 dated 13.04.2024 by the Nodal Officer 
(Legal) also warrants reproduction. It reads as under:
“Medical Education is providing 1% reservation for sports 
persons instead of govt policy of 3%, that too for the 
achievements in 10+1 and 10+2 only, because this is 
crucial time which a student is giving to sports instead of 
studies. Achievements made in 9th and 10th will not hold 
that student to any disadvantage. It’s clear that we don’t 
need such reservation to be extended beyond 11th and 12th.”
30.	 Surprisingly, the State of Punjab thereafter produced another set of 
documents before us. This set of documents merely referred to a 
representation having been received regarding the rules for sports 
quota but no reference was made therein to Ramesh Kumar Kashyap. 
The file moved forward from stage to stage thereafter but there is 
neither mention nor awareness at any stage of Kudrat Kashyap, 
the daughter of Ramesh Kumar Kashyap, being benefited by the 
proposed change that he wanted. Ultimately, the State accepted and 
acted upon his recommendation. 
31.	 In that regard, we may refer to the observations made by this Court 
in Mandeep Singh and others vs. State of Punjab and others6: -
“58. True, the State is entitled to change its policy, yet a 
sudden change without valid reasons will always be seen 
with suspicion. Even in cases where there is no statutory 
prescription of any particular way of doing a thing, the 
executive must observe the long-standing practice, and a 
deviation from such a practice would require passing the 
muster of reasonableness, which is a facet of Article 14 of 
the Constitution. In this regard, this Court in Bannari Amman 
Sugars Ltd. v. CTO [(2005) 1 SCC 625] observed that:
“9. While the discretion to change the policy in 
exercise of the executive power, when not trammelled 
by any statute or rule is wide enough, what is 
imperative and implicit in terms of Article 14 is that a 
change in policy must be made fairly and should not 
give the impression that it was so done arbitrarily or 
6	
2025 INSC 834 : 2025 SCC Online SC 1420

390
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
by any ulterior criteria. The wide sweep of Article 14 
and the requirement of every State action qualifying 
for its validity on this touchstone irrespective of the 
field of activity of the State is an accepted tenet. The 
basic requirement of Article 14 is fairness in action 
by the State, and non-arbitrariness in essence and 
substance is the heartbeat of fair play. Actions are 
amenable, in the panorama of judicial review, only to 
the extent that the State must act validly for discernible 
reasons, not whimsically for any ulterior purpose...”
This Court held that the State and its instrumentalities have a duty 
and responsibility to act fairly and reasonably in terms of the mandate 
of Article 14 of the Constitution and that any decision taken by the 
State must be reasoned and not arbitrary. It was further observed 
that when a thing is done in a post-haste manner, malafides would 
be presumed as anything done with undue haste can be termed 
arbitrary and would not be condonable in law. The aforestated principle 
would apply with equal vigour to an admission process relating to 
sought-after courses like MBBS/BDS. 
32.	 In Sivanandan C.T. and others vs. High Court of Kerala and 
others7, a Constitution Bench observed as under: -
“45. The underlying basis for the application of the doctrine 
of legitimate expectation has expanded and evolved to 
include the principles of good administration. Since citizens 
repose their trust in the State, the actions and policies of 
the State give rise to legitimate expectations that the State 
will adhere to its assurance or past practice by acting in 
a consistent, transparent, and predictable manner. The 
principles of good administration require that the decisions 
of public authorities must withstand the test of consistency, 
transparency and predictability to avoid being regarded as 
arbitrary and therefore violative of Article 14.”
33.	 We, therefore, have no hesitation in holding that the admission 
process to MBBS/BDS courses during session-2024, by altering 
the zone of consideration for sports quota at the behest of Ramesh 
7	
(2024) 3 SCC 799

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
391
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
Kumar Kashyap, whose motives remained undisclosed, cannot be 
sustained even if the State of Punjab acted upon his recommendation 
bonafide and in ignorance of his subterfuge. The very foundation for 
such modification stands vitiated as Ramesh Kumar Kashyap failed 
to disclose that his recommendation benefitted his own daughter, 
Kudrat Kashyap. 
34.	 We may also note that, in Harinagar Sugar Mills Limited (Biscuit 
Division) and another vs. State of Maharashtra and others8, 
this Court observed that internal notings cannot be relied upon to 
establish compliance with procedure. Reference was made to the 
earlier decision of this Court in Pimpri Chinchwad New Township 
Development Authority vs. Vishnudev Cooperative Housing 
Society and others9, wherein it was observed that mere notings 
in the official files of the Government, while dealing with any matter 
pertaining to any person, is essentially an internal matter of the 
Government and will carry with it no legal sanctity. That was a case 
relating to withdrawal from acquisition in relation to a particular 
person’s property and the aforesaid observation was made in that 
context. These decisions have no impact in the present context, 
where the change in policy formulated by the State is being examined 
through the file notings which reflect how the decision-making 
process progressed from stage to stage. The notings in the file, 
which clearly disclose the role played by Ramesh Kumar Kashyap, 
are utmost relevant and cannot be ignored as his intervention in 
the matter was what actually prompted the policy change that was 
brought about thereafter.
35.	 That apart, when the State specifically noted in its Corrigendum 
dated 01.08.2023 that enlargement of the zone of consideration to 
include Classes IX and X was only for session-2023, in view of the 
pandemic, the departure from the policy of limiting consideration 
to only sports achievements during Classes XI and XII, which was 
the policy obtaining prior thereto, ought not to have been effected 
midstream after applications were submitted by the candidates along 
with their sports achievements. 
36.	 More significantly and as already noted hereinabove, the practice 
8	
 (2025) 10 SCC 286
9	
 (2018) 8 SCC 215

392
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and procedure followed by the State of Punjab in leaving the norms 
elastic, without disclosing as to what would be the exact policy with 
regard to the zone of consideration, and allowing itself sufficient 
leeway and elbow room to change such policy midstream during 
the admission process is not in accordance with the principles of 
fair play in action. Lack of transparency at the outset invariably 
enables and makes room for arbitrariness and nepotism to walk in 
through the backdoor, a situation to be eschewed and avoided by 
an egalitarian State. 
37.	 Though the State of Punjab would seek to rely upon case law in 
support of its argument that the Court would, ordinarily, not interfere 
in policy matters, it is equally well settled that when a policy decision 
is riddled with arbitrariness or even provides avenues therefor, the 
Court would be justified in nullifying it. The fact that a policymaker is to 
be allowed some elbow room in formulating policy does not translate 
to allowing scope for arbitrariness or nepotism. We, therefore, find 
no merit in the contentions of the State of Punjab.
38.	 The modification in the policy is, therefore, quashed leaving it open to 
the State of Punjab to apply its mind independently and uninfluenced 
by the so-called recommendation made by Ramesh Kumar Kashyap, 
so as to take a reasoned and well-informed policy decision as to what 
should be the criteria to be followed in future. The State of Punjab 
would be well advised to formulate the admission policy in its entirety 
before initiation of the admission process for each year, if it seeks 
to modify the same time and again. It is not proper and correct to 
do so mid-stream during the admission process. However, insofar 
as session-2024 is concerned, Kudrat Kashyap, who was the direct 
beneficiary of the subterfuge of her father, Ramesh Kumar Kashyap, 
cannot be permitted to enjoy the unlawful benefit garnered in her 
favour through his manipulations and machinations. Though Mansirat 
Kaur, respondent No. 5, also stood benefited thereby, though through 
no fault of hers, she is also liable to be divested of the illegal benefit 
that was conferred upon her owing to the wrongdoings of Ramesh 
Kumar Kashyap. 
39.	 We are conscious of the fact that Ramesh Kumar Kashyap is not a 
party to these proceedings and the observations and remarks that 
we have made are adverse to him. However, we may note that he 
was very much present in the Court during the proceedings and was 
well aware of the sentiments expressed against him by the Court, 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
393
Divjot Sekhon v. State of Punjab and Others
but he took no steps to get himself impleaded, if he had anything 
to say in his own defence. 
40.	 In terms of our findings hereinabove, we would have ordinarily 
directed the University to redraw the entire merit list for the sports 
quota during session-2024, by excluding from consideration the 
sports achievements of candidates secured during Classes IX and 
X. However, doing so at this stage would impact the admissions of 
those who are not even before us and would unsettle settled matters, 
as no candidate other than Divjot Sekhon and Shubhkarman Singh 
has raised a grievance about this issue. The relief to be granted 
pursuant to this judgment is accordingly limited to them. Divjot Sekhon 
and Shubhkarman Singh shall, therefore, be accommodated in the 
seats in the government medical college(s) which were allotted to 
Kudrat Kashyap and Mansirat Kaur, respondent Nos. 4 and 5. In 
turn, Kudrat Kashyap and Mansirat Kaur shall be given the seats 
vacated by Divjot Sekhon and Shubhkarman Singh in Gian Sagar 
Medical College, Banur. The course of study undergone by all of 
them and the fees already paid by all of them shall remain unaffected 
and they shall all be permitted to continue with their studies in their 
new colleges from that stage onwards. 
41.	 In so far as the appeal filed by Gauranshi Dhingra, Agrima Mann 
and Navreet Singh is concerned, it pertains to the policy of the 
State of Punjab while making admissions to MBBS/BDS courses 
under sports quota during session-2025. The modification made at 
the behest of Ramesh Kumar Kashyap during session-2024 was 
perpetuated thereafter and applied during session-2025. Pursuant 
thereto, the appellants were shown at Rank Nos. 13 (Navreet Singh), 
14 (Gauranshi Dhingra) and 15 (Agrima Mann) in the merit list of 
63 candidates prepared by the Director of Sports, Punjab, after 
considering the 67 candidates who had applied under sports quota 
for admission to MBBS/BDS courses. As per the State of Punjab, all 
three appellants were entitled to admission under the sports quota 
in private colleges only.
42.	 The grievance of the appellants is that the authorities continued to 
apply the same modified policy with regard to the enlarged zone of 
consideration that was followed during session-2024, i.e., by including 
Classes IX and X along with Classes XI and XII for assessment of 

394
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the sports achievements of candidates. The High Court nonsuited 
them straightaway by following its earlier decision in Divjot Sekhon’s 
case. However, in the light of what we have stated hereinabove, with 
regard to how the modification of the policy during session-2024 
stands vitiated, continuation of that policy during session-2025 with 
nothing further would also be open to challenge on the same ground. 
However, we are informed that admissions have already been made 
for session-2025 and no candidate who would be adversely affected 
by interference therewith has been made a party to this litigation. 
Therefore, we cannot give a quietus to this lis at this stage. The 
only relief that can be given to these appellants is to grant them the 
liberty to approach the High Court once again by way of a properly 
constituted proceeding, impleading all the proper and necessary 
parties thereto, and seek appropriate relief.
The appeals are allowed in the aforestated terms. 
Parties shall bear their own costs.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
