[2026] 1 S.C.R. 303 : 2026 INSC 4
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd.  
v.  
State of Kerala
(Civil Appeal No. 39 of 2026)
05 January 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala and K.V. Vishwanathan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court by the impugned order was justified in 
holding that the Arbitral Tribunal was appointed at the request of 
the State to adjudicate dispute No.1 only; was the non-issuance 
of a notice u/s.21, Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 by the 
appellant fatal for it to pursue its claim before the Arbitrator.
Headnotes†
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Four packages of 
Road Maintenance Contract were awarded to the appellant – 
Appellant quantified the amounts due and submitted the same 
for decision by the Executive Engineer – As per the appellant, 
since the Executive Engineer/Superintending Engineer failed 
to take any decision, the appellant approached the Adjudicator 
under Clause 25.1 of the General Conditions of Contract, who 
ruled in favour of the appellant on dispute Nos.1 and 3 and 
against it on dispute Nos.2 and 4 – Respondent issued letter 
referring to arbitration Clause 25.3 expressing intention to 
refer only dispute No.1 to arbitration – Eventually, co-arbitrator 
nominated – By its award, the Arbitral tribunal answered all 
four disputes in favour of the appellant – Award challenged 
by the Respondent u/s.34 – Petition allowed by District Judge, 
award was set aside and the decision of the Adjudicator 
restored – Order upheld by High Court – Interference with:
Held: High Court erred in setting aside the award on the basis 
that the appointment of the Tribunal was only to adjudicate dispute 
No.1 – On facts, conduct of the respondent precluded it from 
relying on the mandate of clause 24, 24.1 and 25 to contend 
that the appellant was foreclosed from raising the entire dispute 
* Author

304
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
before the Arbitrator – The party at fault cannot be permitted to 
take advantage of the same – High Court also erred in holding that 
the non-issuance of notice u/s.21, A&C Act by the appellant with 
regard to dispute no.2 to 4 was fatal for it to pursue its claim before 
the arbitrator – There is no mandatory prerequisite for issuance 
of a s.21 notice prior to the commencement of Arbitration – Also, 
High Court erred in holding that the Arbitral Tribunal exceeded its 
jurisdiction in deciding the entire dispute – Arbitration Clause 25.3 
is widely worded and any dispute or difference arising between the 
parties relating to any matter arising out of or concerned with the 
agreement are to be settled in accordance with the A&C Act by the 
Arbitral Tribunal – Judgment of High Court set aside – Award of 
the arbitrator upheld in its entirety – Contract Act, 1872 – s.28(b). 
[Paras 14-16, 18, 22]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s. 21 – Object of – Was 
the non-issuance of a notice u/s.21 by the appellant fatal for 
it to pursue its claim before the Arbitrator:
Held: No – The object of s.21 is only for the purpose of 
commencement of arbitral proceedings – s.21 is concerned only 
with determining the commencement of the dispute for the purpose 
of reckoning limitation – There is no mandatory prerequisite for 
issuance of a s.21 notice prior to the commencement of Arbitration 
– Issuance of a s.21 notice may come to the aid of parties and 
the arbitrator in determining the limitation for the claim – Failure 
to issue a s.21 notice would not be fatal to a party in Arbitration 
if the claim is otherwise valid and the disputes arbitrable – High 
Court erred in holding that the non-issuance of notice u/s.21 by 
the appellant with regard to dispute no.2 to 4 was fatal for it to 
pursue its claim before the arbitrator. [Paras 14, 16]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.2(9), 23:
Held: Once the Arbitral Tribunal is constituted claims, defence 
and, counter claims are filed – Party which normally files the claim 
first is, for convenience, referred to as the ‘claimant’ and the party 
which responds is called the ‘respondent’ – The said respondent 
is also along with the defence statement entitled to file its counter 
claim – Hence, to contend that the appellant cannot be referred 
to as a claimant because no notice u/s.21 has been issued is 
completely untenable. [Para 21]

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
305
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
Case Law Cited
State of Goa v. Praveen Enterprises [2011] 10 SCR 1026 : (2012) 
12 SCC 581; M.K. Shah Engineers & Contractors v. State of M.P. 
[1999] 1 SCR 419 : (1999) 2 SCC 594; ASF Buildtech Private 
Limited v. Shapoorji Pallonji & Company Private Limited (2025) 
9 SCC 76; Adavya Projects Private Limited v. Vishal Structurals 
Private Limited and Others [2025] 5 SCR 243 : (2025) 9 SCC 686; 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Amritsar Gas Service and Others 
[1991] 1 SCC 533 : (1991) 1 SCC 533 – relied on.
Steel Co. Ltd. v. Tiwari Road Lines [2007] 6 SCR 156 : (2007) 5 
SCC 703; MSK Projects India (JV) Limited v. State of Rajasthan and 
Another [2011] 9 SCR 402 : (2011) 10 SCC 573 – held inapplicable.
List of Acts
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Contract Act, 1872; DIAC 
Arbitration Proceedings Rules, 2018.
List of Keywords
Arbitral Tribunal did not exceed its jurisdiction in deciding the entire 
dispute; Entire dispute could be raised before Arbitrator; Entire 
dispute; Arbitration Clause widely worded; Section 21, Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act; Notice under Section 21, Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act; No mandatory prerequisite for issuance of Section 
21, Arbitration and Conciliation Act notice prior to the commencement 
of Arbitration; Party at fault cannot take advantage of the same; 
Road Maintenance Contract; Kerala State Transport Project (KSTP); 
Development of roads in Kerala; Collaboration with World Bank; 
General Conditions of Contract (GCC); Pending payments.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 39 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 07.01.2025 of the High Court 
of Kerala at Ernakulam in ARBA No. 56 of 2012
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Rajiv Shakdher, Sr. Adv., George Thomas, Dhiraj Abraham Philip, 
Sunny George, Febin Mathew Varghese, Ms. Lija Merin John,  
Ms. Soyarchon Khangrah.

306
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Naveen R Nath, Sr. Adv., Nishe Rajen Shonker, Mrs. Anu K Joy, 
Alim Anvar, Mrs. Devika A.l., Santhosh K, Ms. Disha Gupta, Aditya 
Nath, Sai Vaishnav.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the judgment 
dated 07.01.2025 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of 
Kerala at Ernakulam in Arbitration Appeal No. 56/2012. By the said 
judgment, the Division Bench of the High Court upheld the order of 
the District Judge, Thiruvananthapuram, dated 22.06.2010 in O.P. 
(Arb.) No.238 of 2006, al beit, on different grounds. The District Judge 
had set aside the award of the Arbitrator as being beyond the scope 
of reference and against the terms and conditions of the contract 
and restored the decision of the Adjudicator. The Adjudicator had, by 
his order of 14.08.2004, decided four disputes and held in favour of 
the appellant insofar as dispute Nos. 1 and 3 were concerned and 
against the appellant in relation to dispute Nos. 2 and 4. 
3.	
The principal reason assigned by the High Court was that the Arbitral 
Tribunal was appointed at the request of the respondent-State to 
adjudicate on dispute no. (1) alone and the appellant never intended 
to raise any dispute regarding dispute nos. (2) to (4) by issuing a 
separate notice under Section 21 of the Arbitration and Conciliation 
Act, 1996 [for short “the A&C Act”]. The reasoning of the High Court 
is set out hereinbelow:-
25. We must bear in our mind that the arbitral tribunal 
was appointed at the request of the State to adjudicate 
on dispute no. (1) alone. The appellant never intended 
to raise any dispute regarding point Nos. (2) to (4) by 
issuing a separate notice under Section 21 of the Act. The 
assumption that where one-party files an application and 
gets an arbitrator appointed, the other party can raise all 
such disputes under the contract before the arbitrator is 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
307
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
baseless, especially when the law governing the arbitration 
specifically provides that the arbitrator can decide only such 
dispute referred before him and not otherwise. To hold 
otherwise will certainly do violence to the statute. Hence, 
we find that the arbitral tribunal had clearly exceeded the 
jurisdiction in deciding the entire disputes. Perhaps the 
appellant was under a mistaken impression with regard to 
its right to have the entire disputes opened for arbitration. 
We must also note that the State was never put on notice 
regarding the intention of the appellant to go for arbitration. 
Even assuming that the contention of the appellant that the 
State had unequivocally agreed to arbitrate on the entire 
disputes, the tribunal ought to have framed an issue or 
given its finding on the jurisdiction as envisaged under 
Section 16. In the absence of any finding in this regard by 
the tribunal, we are afraid that the award in question clearly 
crossed the contours of the law and thus rendering itself to 
be inexecutable and falling within the mischief of Section 
34 of the Arbitration and Reconciliation [sic] Act, 1996.”
4.	
It is the correctness of this decision, which the appellant has 
questioned before us in this appeal by way of special leave. 
5.	
The facts lie in a very narrow compass:-
5.1	 Four packages of Road Maintenance Contract were awarded 
to the appellant as part of the Kerala State Transport Project 
(KSTP) for development of roads in Kerala in collaboration with 
the World Bank. The work was awarded through competitive 
bidding. 
5.2	 The four projects awarded to the appellant were the following:-
“1. RMC 01” Thiruvananthapuram – Kottarakkara 
Road (5.70 to 25 KM)
2. RMC 03: Thodupuzha – Kalur – Ounukal Road 
(0.00 to 20 KM)
3. RMC 08: Kozikode – Mavoor Road (0.00 to 10.50 
KM)
4. RMC 12: Quilandy – Thamarassery Road (0.00 
to 29.30 KM)”

308
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
5.3	 Under the General Conditions of Contract [for short “GCC”], the 
following mechanism was provided for adjudication of disputes:-
“24. Disputes
24.1 If the Contractor believes that a decision taken 
by the Engineer was either outside the authority given 
to the Engineer by the Contract or that the decision 
was wrongly taken, the decision shall be referred to 
the Adjudicator within 14 days of the notification of 
the Engineer’s decision. 
25. Procedure for Disputes
25.1 The Adjudicator shall give a decision in writing 
within 28 days of receipt of a notification of a dispute.
25.2 The Adjudicator shall be paid daily at the 
rate specified in the Contract Data together with 
reimbursable expenses of the types specified in the 
Contract Data and the cost shall be divided equally 
between the Employer and the Contractor, whatever 
decision is reached by the Adjudicator. Either party 
may refer a decision of the Adjudicator to an Arbitrator 
within 28 days of the Adjudicator’s written decision. 
If neither party refers the dispute to arbitration within 
the above 28 days, the Adjudicator’s decision will be 
final and binding.
25.3 The arbitration shall be conducted in accordance 
with the arbitration procedure stated in the Special 
Conditions of Contract.”
Special Conditions of Contract
“4. ARBITRATION (GCC Clause 25.3)
The procedure for arbitration will be as follows:
25.3. (a) In case of Dispute or difference arising 
between the Employer and a domestic contractor 
relating to any matter arising out of or connected 
with this agreement, such disputes or difference 
shall be settled in accordance with the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996. The arbitral tribunal shall 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
309
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
consist of 3 Arbitrators one each to be appointed by 
the Employer and the contractor. The third Arbitrator 
shall be chosen by the two arbitrators so appointed 
by the Parties and shall act as presiding arbitrator. 
In case of failure of the two arbitrators appointed by 
the parties to reach upon a consensus within a period 
of 30 days from the appointment of the arbitrator 
appointed subsequently, the Presiding arbitrator 
shall be appointed by the Chairman of Executive 
Committee, Indian Roads Congress, New Delhi.”
5.4	 Clause 24.1 states that if the contractor believes that a decision 
taken by the Engineer was either outside the authority given to 
the Engineer by the contract or that the decision was wrongly 
taken, the decision shall be referred to the Adjudicator within 
14 days of the notification of the Engineer’s decision. Hence, 
it is clear that what is contemplated is that disputes may be 
referred to the Adjudicator, where the issue involves decisions 
beyond the authority of the Engineer, or where decision of the 
Engineer is erroneous.
5.5	 Further, under Clause 25.1, the Adjudicator was to give a 
decision within 28 days of the receipt of the notification of 
a dispute and under Clause 25.2, either party may refer the 
decision of the Adjudicator to an Arbitrator within 28 days of 
the Adjudicator’s written decision and if neither party refers 
the dispute to the arbitration within 28 days, the Adjudicator’s 
decision will be final and binding.
5.6	 In the present case, the appellant, by letters of 02.03.2004 
and 24.03.2004 quantified the amounts due and submitted 
the same for decision by the Executive Engineer. According 
to the appellant, since the Executive Engineer/Superintending 
Engineer failed to take any decision, the appellant, by a letter 
dated 15.04.2004, approached the Adjudicator under Clause 
25.1 of the GCC for decision on pending payments classifying 
the disputes as dispute Nos.1 to 4 under the following heads:-
“The disputes before the Adjudicator were:
1.	
Value of work to be considered for calculating 
the price adjustment for bitumen and POL.

310
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2.	
Decision for releasing the escalation during the 
extended periods.
3.	
Price of bitumen to be considered for calculation 
of price adjustment of the bitumen.
4.	
Release of interest payable at 12% per annum 
for the delay in releasing the eligible payments 
beyond 42 hours from the date of submission 
of the monthly statement of the value of work 
done during the period as per Clause 42.2 and 
43.1 of General Conditions of Contract.”
5.7	 The Adjudicator, by his decision of 14.08.2004, ruled in favour 
of the appellant on dispute Nos.1 and 3 and ruled against the 
appellant on dispute Nos. 2 and 4.
5.8	 Notwithstanding the decision of the Adjudicator and the 
submission of the final bill by the appellant, the respondent did 
not settle the bill on the ground that the finding of the Adjudicator 
qua dispute No.1 was unacceptable to the respondent. 
5.9	 On 01.10.2004, the respondent addressed the following letter 
to the appellant.
“Sub: RMC-Contractors—RMC-01,03,08,12— 
Adjudication-reg.
Ref: Award of Adjudicator dated 14.8.2004
Further to the letter cited under reference above, we 
write to inform you that the award of the Adjudication 
for Dispute No. 1 is not acceptable and we intent to 
refer the matter for an arbitration. We have appointed 
Mr. Subash Chandra Bose, as our arbitrator. 
Therefore, you may propose your arbitrator as per 
clause 25.3 of General Conditions of contract and 
intimate for further action.”
5.10	 It will be seen that the reference was under Clause 25.3 
which is the arbitration clause. The letter was issued by the 
respondent and, according to the respondent, it was confined 
to dispute No.1, namely, “value of work to be considered for 
calculating the price adjustment for bitumen and POL. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
311
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
5.11	 In response to the letter dated 01.10.2004, the appellant sent 
a letter on 14.10.2004 to the respondent. The appellant stated 
that the adjudicator’s decision was issued on 14.08.2004 and 
the time limit for reference to arbitration was till 11.09.2004, (on 
the expiry of 28 days) and as such the letter dated 01.10.2004 
was beyond the stipulated time. The appellant stated that 
the decision of the adjudicator has become final and binding 
upon both the parties. The stand of the appellant was that, 
in view of the same, the Arbitral Tribunal has no jurisdiction 
to enter into the reference. The appellnt also stated that they 
have not received any payment and that compound interest 
would be charged.
5.12	 The respondent addressed a letter dated 30.10.2004 to the 
appellant in response to the appellant’s letter dated 14.10.2004. 
The respondent stated that by their letter dated 01.10.2004, 
they had conveyed their intention to refer dispute No.1 to the 
arbitrator. They further added that they disagreed with the 
“recommendations of the adjudicator”. It was further averred 
that under Clause 25.2 of the GCC the issue of delay in 
referring the matter to arbitration can also be referred and 
the appellant can take up the issue before the arbitrator. The 
crucial contents of the letter reads as follows:-
“…… Moreover as per clause 24.1 of the agreement 
within 14 days you have to refer to the adjudicator 
any decision not acceptable to you. Whereas 
all the disputes referred are after the stipulated 
time for referring the decision of Engineer to 
Adjudicator. Hence your argument [sic] with 
regard to dates will cut at the root of petition 
considered by the adjudicator.
Hence you are here by called upon to forward the 
name of the Co-arbitrator to constitute the tribunal. 
You are contractually bound to forward the name of 
the Co-arbitrator and question regarding dates and 
whether decision is binding on KSTP can be referred 
to the arbitrator.
As stated earlier your claims before the adjudicator 
are delayed for several months and refused to 

312
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
nominate the name of co-arbitrator will be viewed 
were serious and we hope you can understand 
the implications of disobedience of request of 
the employer. Moreover the employer is entitled 
proceed further to set aside the recommendation of 
adjudicator in accordance with agreement. Hence 
you are required to forward the name of co-arbitrator 
to our office and to Mr. Subash Chandra Bose to 
proceed further. It is true that if the decision of 
the Adjudicator is not acceptable to either party, 
may refer within 28 days to the Arbitrator. But 
there is no existing Arbitrator. This body has to 
be constituted and then only refer the matter to 
the Arbitrator. We have taken action to constitute 
the Arbitration Panel.
Since this is a matter of dispute we are not in a 
position to release the payment. Which shall be 
subject to Arbitrations decision.”
(Emphasis supplied)
5.13	 The respondent also stated that any refusal to nominate the 
co-arbitrator would be viewed seriously and hoped that the 
appellant will understand the implications of disobedience 
of request of the employer. It was also stated that since 
it is a matter of dispute, they were not in a position to 
release payment which shall be subject to the decision in 
arbitration.
5.14	 In response to the letter dated 30.10.2004 of the respondent, 
the appellant wrote to the respondent on 29.11.2004. After 
disagreeing with the interpretation of the respondent on Clause 
25.2, the appellant agreed to nominate the co-arbitrator. The 
letter further stated as follows:-
“We reiterate that the decision of the Adjudicator’s 
decision dated 14.08.2004 is final and binding on 
both the parties as per clause 25,2 of the GCC. Since 
your grievance against the decision of adjudicator and 
no notice to go for arbitration was given within the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
313
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
stipulated period of GGC 25.2, the said decision is 
final and binding upon KSTP. Therefore, please take 
notice that we reserve the dispute that exists as on 
date for an adjudication by the Arbitral Tribunal is 
confined to the following.
Whether the parties have agreed under the contract 
to accept the decision of the adjudicator as final 
and binding on both the parties if notice to refer the 
decision to arbitration is not given within 28 days of 
the decision of the adjudicator?
If it is so agreed, whether the decision given by the 
adjudicator on 14.08.2004 is final and binding on both 
the parties as per clause 25.2 of the GCC?
Since the amount payable as per the decision of 
the adjudicator is delayed, whether the contractor is 
entitled for monthly compound interest quarterly on 
the principle sum so adjudicated as demanded by 
the contractor vide letter dated 14-10-04? If so, what 
is the reasonable rate of interest payable?
Without prejudice to the above, we would like 
record herein that if the Arbitral Tribunal ultimately 
decides that the adjudicator’s decision is not final 
and binding and can be reopened in arbitration, 
we would be raising the following issues for 
reference to the Arbitral Tribunal by way of counter  
claim.
Whether the reason for delay in execution of work 
and the resultant extension of time of completion 
of the work is attributable to the contractor or to 
KSTP?
If so, whether the contractor is entitled to 
escalation during the approved extended period 
of contract?
Whether the liquidated damages imposed on the 
contractor during the extended period of contract 
is sustainable?

314
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Whether the contractor is eligible for interest 
on all delayed payments beyond 42 days after 
submission of the bill to the Engineer?
We have already submitted the final bill for all the 
above projects and the payment is still pending 
for payment. Payment for RMC 8 & 12 are due for 
payment since 08-05-04 and 10.01.04 respectively. 
We would request you to kindly release the 
payment against the work done for which there is 
no dispute for the item rates at an early date so 
that accumulation of interest charges for the late 
payment can be avoided.”
(Emphasis supplied)
5.15	 On 11.01.2005, the Arbitral Tribunal was constituted. Initially, 
the appellant did file the application to consider the Adjudicator’s 
decision as final and binding which the respondent opposed. 
However, the appellant did not press the application and agreed 
to file its claim before the Arbitrator. The respondent filed an 
application to treat the entire decision of the Adjudicator as 
null and void on the ground that it was contrary to Clause 24.1 
of the GCC. The respondent also objected to the appellant 
being allowed to file the claim petition with regard to all the 
issues which, according to the respondent, led to enlargement 
of the jurisdiction. 
5.16	 Respondent in the statement filed on 09.03.2005 sought a 
declaration that the decision of the adjudicator be declared 
null and void and contended that the appellant’s reference to 
the adjudicator itself was out of time and that the acceptance 
of the dispute by the adjudicator was not as per Clause 24.1. 
The relevant para in the statement is as follows:-
“If the contractor had any protest or dispute in 
calculating the ‘R’ value and price of Bitumen. 
The contractor should have referred the matter 
to the Adjudicator within 14 days of notification. 
The notification is the date of payment as per  
clause 24.1.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
315
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
The last date for referring the matter to the Adjudicator 
shall be as follows:
Contract
Date of 
payment 
(Decision)
To be 
reported 
to the 
Adjudicator
Date of 
report by 
contractor
Total 
delays
RMC-01
-
6.9.03
-
20.09.03
-
15.4.04
209 
days
RMC-03
-
15.3.03
-
29.3.03
-
15.4.04
383 
days
RMC-08
-
8.7.03
-
22.7.03
-
15.4.04
267 
days
RMC-12
-
5.6.03
-
19.6.03
-
15.4.04
299 
days
From the above it was noticed that the matter 
on dispute was referred to the Adjudicator was 
delayed. Hence the acceptance of dispute by 
the Adjudicator was not as per clause 24.1 and 
the Recommendation of the Adjudicator to be 
set aside.
As explained in the para 7.2. Our main contention 
is that the contractor is the defaulter, who refers the 
decision of the employer in calculation of ‘R’ value 
and the Bitumen price for price escalation as a dispute 
after a huge delay as tabulated in para 7.2. The 
adjudicator not considered the delay made by the 
contractor in referring the dispute to the Adjudication.
Since the contractors action for referring the 
disputes to the Adjudicator after expiring the time 
frame as per contract clause 24.1. The acceptance 
of dispute and award by the Adjudicators is 
considered to be null and void.”
(Emphasis supplied)
5.17	 By its ruling of 16.12.2005 under Section 16 of the A&C Act, 
the Arbitral Tribunal held that the claims of the appellant still 
remained unsettled. It further held that the arbitration clause 

316
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
was comprehensive enough to include any matter arising 
out of or connected with the Agreement. It further held that 
the prayer of the respondent to declare the Adjudicator’s 
decision as null and void indicated their intention to reopen 
the four disputes originally brought for consideration before 
the Adjudicator. The Tribunal, however, disallowed the claims 
of the appellant insofar as they were beyond the claims raised 
before the Adjudicator. Pursuant to the decision under Section 
16, the appellant revised its claims and confined the claims 
to four issues permitted by the order of 16.12.2005. In view 
of this, we are not called upon to decide whether the Arbitral 
Tribunal was justified in confining the appellant to the four 
issues raised before the Adjudicator.
5.18	 By its award of 29.06.2006, the Arbitral Tribunal answered 
all four issues in favour of the appellant. In all, the appellant 
was awarded a total sum of Rs.1,99,90,777/- along with post 
award interest @ 18% p.a. Inter alia, the award of the arbitrator 
recorded that:-
A)	
several claims were first raised by the Appellant and they 
still remained as unsettled claims; 
B)	
Arbitration agreement is comprehensive enough to 
cover any dispute arising out of or in connection with 
the agreement; 
C)	
The prayer of the respondent to declare the decision 
of the adjudicator null and void virtually indicated their 
intention to open the 4 disputes that are brought before 
the Arbitral Tribunal; 
D)	
Both parties have rejected the decision of the Adjudicator 
which has now become infructuous.
5.19	 The respondent challenged the Award under Section 34 before 
the District Judge, Thiruvananthapuram in O.P.(Arbitration) No. 
238 of 2006. The respondent also challenged the decision 
under Section 16 dated 16.10.2005 in its Section 34 petition. 
By judgment dated 26.06.2010, the District Judge allowed 
respondent’s Section 34 petition and set aside the award 
and restored the decision of the Adjudicator on the following 
two grounds:-

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
317
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
(i)	
there was no provision in the contract for extending 
the time for referring the issue beyond the period of 28 
days; and 
(ii)	
hence there cannot be any question of there being 
any consensus between the parties for referring all the 
disputes.
5.20	 In spite of so holding, the District Judge, for reasons best 
known to him, restored the recommendations of the Adjudicator. 
Aggrieved, the appellant filed an appeal under Section 37 of the 
A&C Act. The Division Bench, by the order impugned, clearly 
found that imposition of 28 days time-limit in Clause 25.2 was 
contrary to Section 28(b) of the Contract Act. However, on the 
ground that the appellant never sought reference of the dispute 
by issuing any notice under Section 21 of the A&C Act and 
only the respondent had issued such a notice on one issue, 
it found the award to be invalid. However, the order restoring 
the decision of the Adjudicator was not disturbed. 
6.	
We have heard Mr. Rajiv Shakdher, learned Senior Advocate, for 
the appellant and Mr. Naveen R. Nath, learned Senior Advocate for 
the respondent. We have gone through the records, including the 
written submissions filed by the respective parties.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANT: -
7.	
The learned senior counsel for the appellant submits that the 
arbitration clause is exhaustive and covers any dispute or difference 
arising between the parties relating to any matter arising out of or 
connected with the agreement. According to the learned senior 
counsel, the agreement was not limited to the reference of disputes 
decided by the adjudicator. It is further contended by the learned 
senior counsel that the Division Bench has set aside the award on 
a ground not taken by the respondent before the Arbitral Tribunal 
or in Court. According to the learned senior counsel, such a course 
of action was beyond the scope of Section 37 appeal.
8.	
Learned senior counsel further contends that there is a clear waiver 
under Section 4 of the A&C Act. Learned senior counsel for the 
appellant contends that notice is not envisaged at the stage of 
invocation under Clause 25.3 of the GCC and Clause 4 of the Special 
Conditions of Contract. Learned senior counsel contends that Section 

318
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
21 of the A&C Act opens with the phrase “Unless otherwise agreed by 
the parties”, and contends that, in the present case, it was otherwise 
agreed in the contract that if a party wishes to settle the dispute, it 
may first notify claims to the other party and refer it for settlement 
with the engineer and, thereafter, refer it to the adjudicator. According 
to the learned senior counsel, the dispute has already been referred 
through two stages before referring it to arbitration.
9.	
Learned senior counsel further contends that the purpose of Section 
21 was to primarily determine whether the claims are within limitation, 
and no award can be set aside for want of a Section 21 notice. In 
any event, learned senior counsel contends that the letter dated 
29.11.2004 issued by the appellant should be construed as the 
Section 21 notice. Assuming everything against the appellant, the 
learned senior counsel contends, that there is no requirement of 
issuance of notice under Section 21 by both parties. According to the 
learned senior counsel, if one party take steps to constitute an Arbitral 
Tribunal, the other party can raise all claims and counterclaims. Any 
other interpretation would result in multiple arbitration and conflicting 
awards. In conclusion, it was submitted that the Arbitral Tribunal is 
a final adjudicator regarding the arbitral procedure. So contending, 
it was prayed that the impugned order deserves to be set aside and 
the award of the arbitrator be upheld in entirety. 
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT: -
10.	 Learned senior counsel for the respondent contends that the dispute 
resolution mechanism comprises escalatory measures which would 
mean that the dispute needs to be first resolved by the engineer 
and, in case the decision was not acceptable, it was to be referred 
to the adjudicator within 14 days. According to the learned senior 
counsel, the adjudicator’s decision is required to be in writing within 
28 days of the receipt of the notification of dispute. Further what is 
referred to the arbitrator is the adjudicator’s decision and not the 
original dispute before the engineer.
11.	 Learned senior counsel submits that this is the agreed procedure for 
the appointment of the arbitrators as contemplated under Section 
11(2); that these escalatory measures have statutory significance 
since they are intended to narrow the dispute referable to the Arbitral 
Tribunal. In view of that, it is submitted that for a party to invoke 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
319
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
arbitration it must clearly and categorically be signified, by issuance 
of notice that it disputes the adjudicator’s decisions either in entirety 
or on specified issues.
12.	 Learned senior counsel submits that the procedure for appointment of 
an arbitrator must be strictly complied and even under Section 28(3) of 
the A&C Act, the Arbitral Tribunal is required to take into account the 
terms of the contract. Learned senior counsel submits that issuance 
of notice under Section 21 is a mandatory requirement and both the 
parties to an arbitration agreement have the right to be informed of 
the arbitral dispute before the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal. 
According to the learned senior counsel, the appellant could never 
be the claimant and the expression claimant can only be attributed 
to that party who initiates the arbitration proceedings by issuance of 
notice under Section 21. Learned senior counsel disputes the fact 
that the letter dated 14.10.2004 or 29.11.2004 of the appellant could 
be treated as Section 21 notice. Learned senior counsel submits that 
the case of the respondent was covered by para 41(c) of the decision 
of this Court in State of Goa v. Praveen Enterprises1.
QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION: -
13.	 In the above background, the questions that arises for consideration 
are (a) whether the High Court by the impugned order was justified 
in holding that the Arbitral Tribunal was appointed at the request of 
the State to adjudicate dispute No. 1 only? (b) Was the non-issuance 
of a notice under Section 21 of the A&C Act by the appellant fatal 
for it to pursue its claim before the Arbitrator? 
ANALYSIS AND REASONING: -
14.	 In our opinion, the High Court totally erred in setting aside the 
award on the basis that the appointment of the Tribunal was only to 
adjudicate dispute No.1. The High Court also erred in holding that 
the non-issuance of notice under Section 21 of the A&C Act by the 
appellant with regard to dispute no. 2 to 4 was fatal for it to pursue 
its claim before the arbitrator. The High Court erred in holding that 
the Arbitral Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction in deciding the entire 
dispute. We say so for the following reasons. 
1	
(2012) 12 SCC 581

320
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
CONDUCT OF THE RESPONDENT: -
15.	 Firstly, the sequence of events clearly demonstrates that the present 
was a case where conduct of the respondent clearly precluded it 
from relying on the mandate of clause 24, 24.1 and 25 to contend 
that the appellant was foreclosed from raising the entire dispute 
before the Arbitrator. This is because: -
a)	
Clause 24.1 stipulated a time limit of 14 days to refer the 
decision of the Engineer to the adjudicator. While the appellant 
contends that the Engineer never decided on any issue after 
the appellant quantified the amounts and submitted the same 
on 02.03.2024 and 24.03.2024, the respondent has a different 
story to tell. According to the respondent, the payment dates 
of 06.09.2023, 15.03.2003, 08.07.2003 and 05.06.2003 for 
the four different contracts respectively, itself were the dates 
of the decision of the Engineer and the appellant delayed the 
reference to the adjudicator by 209 days, 383 days, 267 days 
and 299 days respectively. Even the adjudicator proceeded on 
the basis that the date of payments was the date of decision 
of the Engineer. Before the adjudicator no objection was taken 
by the respondent about the reference to the adjudicator itself 
being barred by time and beyond the scope of clause 24.1. 
The adjudicator went ahead and decided dispute Nos.1 and 3 
in favour of the appellant and dispute Nos.2 and 4 in favour of 
the respondent. The Adjudicator gave his decision on 14 August 
2004. Under Clause 25.1, the adjudicator was approached on 
15.04.2004 and going by clause 25.1 the adjudicator ought to 
have given his decision within 28 days from 15.04.2004, that is 
on or before 13.05.2004. This is the second instance of parties 
including adjudicator not following the drill of clause 25.1, in its 
true letter and spirit.
b)	
Under Clause 25.2, either party can refer the decision of the 
adjudicator to the Arbitrator within 28 days of the adjudicator’s 
written decision and if neither party refers the dispute to the 
adjudicator within 28 days, the adjudicator’s decision will be 
final and binding. In this case, it was on 01.10.2004 i.e. after 
the expiry of 56 days that the respondent issued the letter which 
they claimed was the reference of the decision in dispute No.1 
of the adjudicator. The High Court in the impugned order has 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
321
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
in any event found that the 28 days time limit offends Section 
28(b) of the Contract Act. Further, when the appellant wrote back 
objecting to the breach of time limit of 28 days, the respondent 
wrote back saying that the issue of delay in referring can itself 
be referred to the Arbitrator and that they disagreed with the 
recommendation of the adjudicator. This itself indicates that 
notwithstanding clause 25.2 specifying that on the expiry of 
28 days the decision of the adjudicator was final and binding, 
the respondent never treated the decision of the adjudicator 
as final and binding.
c)	
Further, the appellant had not received any payments under 
any of the heads and the respondent asserted that since the 
matter is in dispute, they were not in a position to release the 
payment which, according to them, is subject to the decision 
of the Arbitrator. 
d)	
The appellant also wrote to the respondent stating that they 
disagreed with the interpretation of the respondent of clause 
24.2 and that they will be raising all issues before the Arbitrator 
to which there was no response from the respondent. 
e)	
To make the matters worse for the respondent before the Arbitral 
Tribunal they filed an application to treat the entire decision of 
the adjudicator as null and void on the ground that clause 24.1 
had been violated. 
f)	
The Arbitral Tribunal adjudicating on the Section 16 objection 
of the respondent under Section 16 of A&C rightly held that 
the claims of the appellant remained unsettled and further that 
the arbitration clause was comprehensive enough to include 
any matter arising out of or connected with the agreement. 
The Tribunal further held that the prayer of the respondent to 
declare the adjudicator’s decision as null and void indicated 
their intention to reopen the four disputes originally brought 
for consideration. 
This Court in M.K. Shah Engineers & Contractors vs. State of 
M.P.2, a case similar to the present where the employer was trying 
2	
(1999) 2 SCC 594

322
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to take advantage of its own wrong, rejected the contention of the 
employer and held as follows: -
“14. In Halsbury’s Laws of England (4th Edn.) Vol. 2, vide 
paras 652, 654, at pp. 363, 365, the law is so stated. The 
arbitration agreements may contain a clause which requires 
a certain act to be completed within a specified period and 
which provides that if that act is not done, either the claim 
or the ability to commence an arbitration will be barred. 
Such clauses are sometimes known as “Atlantic Shipping” 
clauses. The consequences of the expiry of a contractual 
limitation period before the completion of the specific act 
may however be avoided in three circumstances:
(i) if the court exercises its discretion statutorily conferred 
on it, to extend the period to avoid undue hardship;
(ii) if the arbitration clause confers a discretion on the 
arbitrator to extend the period and he exercises it; 
(iii) if the conduct of either party precludes his relying on 
the time-bar against the claimant.
17. No one can be permitted to take advantage of one's 
own wrong. The respondent-State of M.P. cannot and 
could not have been heard to plead denial of the two 
appellants' right to seek reference to arbitration for non-
compliance with the earlier part of clause 3.3.29. In the 
case of M/s Chabaldas & Sons, the clause was complied 
with. Alternatively, even if it was not complied with in the 
case of M/s Chabaldas & Sons, but certainly in the case 
of M/s M.K. Shaw, the fault for non-compliance lies with 
the respondent-State of M.P. through its officials. The plea 
of bar, if any, created by the earlier part of clause 3.3.29 
cannot be permitted to be set up by a party which itself has 
been responsible for frustrating the operation thereof. It will 
be a travesty of justice if the appellants for the fault of the 
respondents are denied the right to have recourse to the 
remedy of arbitration. A closer scrutiny of clause 3.3.29 
clearly suggests that the parties intended to enter into 
an arbitration agreement for deciding all the questions 
and disputes arising between them through arbitration 
and thereby excluding the jurisdiction of ordinary civil 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
323
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
courts. Such reference to arbitration is required to be 
preceded by a decision of the Superintending Engineer 
and a challenge to such decision within 28 days by the 
party feeling aggrieved therewith. The steps preceding 
the coming into operation of the arbitration clause 
though essential are capable of being waived and if 
one party has by its own conduct or the conduct of its 
officials, disabled such preceding steps being taken, it 
will be deemed that the procedural prerequisites were 
waived. The party at fault cannot be permitted to set up 
the bar of non-performance of prerequisite obligation 
so as to exclude the applicability and operation of the 
arbitration clause.”
(Emphasis supplied)
We draw considerable support from the ratio of M.K. Shah (supra) on 
the aspect of conduct of the respondent and the holding therein, that 
the party at fault cannot be permitted to take advantage of the same. 
Further, like in M.K. Shah (supra) the Arbitration clause here also is 
of wide amplitude. In view of the above, we reject the contention of 
the respondent that the procedure for appointment of an arbitrator 
has not been complied with in this case and, as such, the award has 
to be set aside. We find absolutely no merit in the same.
OBJECT OF SECTION 21 OF A&C ACT: -
16.	 Secondly, the object of Section 21 of A&C Act, is only for the purpose 
of commencement of arbitral proceedings is also well settled. 
Section 21 is concerned only with determining the commencement 
of the dispute for the purpose of reckoning limitation. There is no 
mandatory prerequisite for issuance of a Section 21 notice prior to 
the commencement of Arbitration. Issuance of a Section 21 notice 
may come to the aid of parties and the arbitrator in determining the 
limitation for the claim. Failure to issue a Section 21 notice would 
not be fatal to a party in Arbitration if the claim is otherwise valid 
and the disputes arbitrable. In ASF Buildtech Private Limited vs. 
Shapoorji Pallonji & Company Private Limited3, one of us, J.B. 
Pardiwala J., felicitously put the principle thus: -
3	
(2025) 9 SCC 76

324
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
163. The marginal note appended to Section 21 of the 
1996 Act makes it abundantly clear that the notice to be 
issued thereunder is for the purpose of “commencement 
of arbitration proceedings”. The substantive provision 
further makes it clear that the date on which a request/
notice of invocation for referring a dispute is received 
by the respondent, would the date on which the arbitral 
proceedings in respect of a particular dispute commences. 
The words “particular dispute” assume significance in the 
interpretation of this provision and its underlying object. 
It indicates that the provision is concerned only with 
determining when arbitration is deemed to have 
commenced for the specific dispute mentioned in the 
notice. The language in which the said provision is 
couched is neither prohibitive or exhaustive insofar 
as reference of any other disputes which although not 
specified in the notice of invocation yet, nonetheless 
falls within the scope of the arbitration agreement. 
The term “particular dispute”, does not mean all 
disputes, nor does it confine the jurisdiction of the 
Arbitral Tribunal which is said to be one emanating 
from the “arbitration agreement” to only those disputes 
mentioned in the notice of invocation, as it would 
tantamount to reading a restriction into the jurisdiction 
of the Arbitral Tribunal to the bounds of the notice of 
invocation instead of the arbitration agreement. Thus, 
there is no inhibition under Section 21 of the 1996 Act 
for raising any other dispute or claim which is covered 
under the arbitration agreement in the absence of 
any such notice. Section 21 is procedural rather than 
jurisdictional it does not serve to create or validate the 
arbitration agreement itself, nor is it a precondition for 
the existence of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction, but merely 
operates as a statutory mechanism to ascertain the 
date of initiation for reckoning limitation.
165. Section 23 sub-section (1) places an obligation upon 
the claimant to state the facts supporting his “claim”, the 
points at issue and the relief or remedy sought by way of 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
325
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
its statement of claim, before the Arbitral Tribunal. Notably, 
the legislature, in the first part of the said sub-section, 
has deliberately and consciously used the term “claim” 
as opposed to “particular dispute” employed in Section 21 
of the 1996 Act. Although, it could be said that the term 
“particular dispute” under Section 21 connotes a larger 
umbrella within which the term “claim” under Section 23 
would be subsumed, thereby suggesting that there is no 
scope to deviate from what was sought to be referred 
by the notice of invocation, we do not think so. We say 
so because, the requirement for providing the points at 
issue and the relief or remedy sought that exists in sub-
section (1) of Section 23 of the 1996 Act is patently absent 
in Section 21 of the 1996 Act, which clearly shows that the 
scope and object of these two provisions are at variance 
to each other. Further, this sub-section does not stipulate 
either explicitly or implicitly, that such “claim” must be the 
same or in tandem with the “particular dispute” in respect 
of which the notice of invocation was issued under Section 
21 of the 1996 Act. This distinction in terminology is neither 
incidental nor redundant; rather, it reflects a conscious 
legislative design to demarcate the procedural objective 
of Section 21 from the substantive function sought or the 
framing of issues served by Section 23. Unlike Section 23, 
Section 21 does not require any articulation of the relief 
its sole purpose is to indicate when arbitration is deemed 
to have commenced, for the limited purpose of computing 
the limitation period.
169. Any restriction on the nature or content of claims, 
counterclaims, or set-offs in arbitration must be 
sourced solely from the express language of Section 
23 and not from Section 21. Section(s) 21 and 23 of 
the 1996 Act although overlap in some aspects with 
each other in terms of the claims that would ordinarily 
be referred to the Tribunal more often than not tend to 
coincide, yet they are by no means tethered together 
in such a manner that neither of them can survive 
without one another. The latter serves only a procedural 
function and does not condition or limit the Tribunal’s 

326
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
jurisdiction to adjudicate claims that may not have 
been specifically invoked at the threshold stage. To 
read such a limitation into the statutory scheme would 
run contrary to both the text and the object of the Act.”
(Emphasis supplied)
More recently in Adavya Projects Private Limited v. Vishal 
Structurals Private Limited and others4, this Court reiterating 
the purpose and significance of a notice under Section 21 had the 
following to observe: -
“24. At this point, it is important to note this Court’s 
decision in State of Goa v. Praveen Enterprises [State 
of Goa v. Praveen Enterprises, (2012) 12 SCC 581] 
wherein it was held that the claims and disputes raised 
in the notice under Section 21 do not restrict and limit 
the claims that can be raised before the Arbitral Tribunal. 
The consequence of not raising a claim in the notice 
is only that the limitation period for such claim that is 
raised before the Arbitral Tribunal for the first time will 
be calculated differently vis-à-vis claims raised in the 
notice. However, non-inclusion of certain disputes in 
the Section 21 notice does not preclude a claimant from 
raising them during the arbitration, as long as they are 
covered under the arbitration agreement. Further, merely 
because a respondent did not issue a notice raising 
counterclaims, he is not precluded from raising the 
same before the Arbitral Tribunal, as long as such 
counterclaims fall within the scope of the arbitration 
agreement.” 
[Emphasis supplied]
17.	 At this stage, it is appropriate to refer to the following passage from 
the decision of this Court in Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. v. Amritsar 
Gas Service and Others5 which reinforces our holding:-
4	
(2025) 9 SCC 686
5	
(1991) 1 SCC 533

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
327
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
“15. The appellant’s grievance regarding non-consideration 
of its counter-claim for the reason given in the award does 
appear to have some merit. In view of the fact that reference 
to arbitrator was made by this Court in an appeal arising 
out of refusal to stay the suit under Section 34 of the 
Arbitration Act and the reference was made of all disputes 
between the parties in the suit, the occasion to make a 
counter-claim in the written statement could arise only 
after the order of reference. The pleadings of the parties 
were filed before the arbitrator, and the reference covered 
all disputes between the parties in the suit. Accordingly, 
the counter-claim could not be made at any earlier stage. 
Refusal to consider the counter-claim for the only reason 
given in the award does, therefore, disclose an error of law 
apparent on the face of the award. However, in the present 
case, the counter-claim not being pressed at this stage 
by learned counsel for the appellant, it is unnecessary to 
examine this matter any further.”
ARBITRATION CLAUSE – WIDELY WORDED: -
18.	 Thirdly, Clause 25.3 is widely worded and any dispute or difference 
arising between the parties relating to any matter arising out of or 
concerned with the agreement are to be settled in accordance with 
the A&C Act by the Arbitral Tribunal. As held in State of Goa vs. 
Praveen Enterprises6 if an arbitration agreement provides that all 
disputes between the parties relating to the contract shall be referred 
to arbitration, the reference contemplated is the act of parties to the 
arbitration agreement. In Praveen Enterprises (supra) it has been 
further held as follows:-
“19. There can be claims by a claimant even without 
a notice seeking reference. Let us take an example 
where a notice is issued by a claimant raising disputes 
regarding Claims A and B and seeking reference 
thereof to arbitration. On appointment of the arbitrator, 
the claimant files a claim statement in regard to the said 
Claims A and B. Subsequently if the claimant amends 
6	
(2012) 12 SCC 581

328
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the claim statement by adding Claim C [which is 
permitted under Section 23(3) of the Act] the additional 
Claim C would not be preceded by a notice seeking 
arbitration. The date of amendment by which Claim 
C was introduced, will become the relevant date for 
determining the limitation in regard to the said Claim 
C, whereas the date on which the notice seeking 
arbitration was served on the other party, will be the 
relevant date for deciding the limitation in regard to 
Claims A and B. Be that as it may.
26. Section 23 of the Act makes it clear that when the 
arbitrator is appointed, the claimant is required to 
file the statement and the respondent has to file his 
defence statement before the arbitrator. The claimant 
is not bound to restrict his statement of claim to the 
claims already raised by him by notice, “unless the 
parties have otherwise agreed as to the required 
elements” of such claim statement. It is also made 
clear that “unless otherwise agreed by the parties” the 
claimant can also subsequently amend or supplement 
the claims in the claim statement. That is, unless the 
arbitration agreement requires the arbitrator to decide 
only the specifically referred disputes, the claimant 
can while filing the statement of claim or thereafter, 
amend or add to the claims already made.
27. Similarly, Section 23 read with Section 2(9) 
makes it clear that a respondent is entitled to raise 
a counterclaim “unless the parties have otherwise 
agreed” and also add to or amend the counterclaim, 
“unless otherwise agreed”. In short, unless the 
arbitration agreement requires the arbitrator to 
decide only the specifically referred disputes, the 
respondent can file counterclaims and amend or add 
to the same, except where the arbitration agreement 
restricts the arbitration to only those disputes which 
are specifically referred to arbitration, both the claimant 
and the respondent are entitled to make any claims 
or counterclaims and further entitled to add to or 
amend such claims and counterclaims provided they 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
329
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
are arbitrable and within limitation.
41. The position emerging from the above discussion 
may be summed up as follows:
(a) Section 11 of the Act requires the Chief Justice 
or his designate to either appoint the arbitrator(s) 
or take necessary measures in accordance with the 
appointment procedure contained in the arbitration 
agreement. The Chief Justice or the designate is not 
required to draw up the list of disputes and refer them 
to arbitration. The appointment of the Arbitral Tribunal 
is an implied reference in terms of the arbitration 
agreement.
(b) Where the arbitration agreement provides for 
referring all disputes between the parties (whether 
without any exceptions or subject to exceptions), 
the arbitrator will have jurisdiction to entertain any 
counterclaim, even though it was not raised at a stage 
earlier to the stage of pleadings before the arbitrator.
(c) Where however the arbitration agreement requires 
specific disputes to be referred to arbitration and 
provides that the arbitrator will have the jurisdiction 
to decide only the disputes so referred, the arbitrator’s 
jurisdiction is controlled by the specific reference and 
he cannot travel beyond the reference, nor entertain 
any additional claims or counterclaims which are not 
part of the disputes specifically referred to arbitration.”
It will be seen that when the Arbitral Tribunal is constituted, the 
claimant is required to file the statement and the respondent to file his 
defence statement with counter claim, if any, before the arbitrator. The 
claimant is not bound to restrict his statement of claim to the claims 
raised by him in the notice issued, if any, before. The claimant can 
also amend or supplement the claims in the claim statement unless 
the arbitration agreement requires the arbitrator to decide only the 
specifically referred disputes. Equally, counter claims can also be 
filed and amended. In the present case, we have already held that 
the rigors of clause 24, 24.1 and 25 have not been followed by the 
parties and by their conduct the entire dispute have been thrown 
at large before the Arbitral Tribunal. Hence, the contention of the 

330
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
respondent that the case of the parties is governed by para 41(c) 
of Praveen Enterprises (supra) is rejected. 
RELEVANT STATUTORY PROVISIONS: -
19.	 Section 2(9) of the A&C Act reads as under:-
“2(9) Where this Part, other than clause (a) of section 25 
or clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 32, refers to a 
claim, it shall also apply to a counter-claim, and where 
it refers to a defence, it shall also apply to a defence to 
that counter-claim.”
20.	 Section 23 of the A&C Act as is relevant is also setout hereinbelow:-
“23. Statement of claim and defence.—(1) Within the 
period of time agreed upon by the parties or determined 
by the arbitral tribunal, the claimant shall state the facts 
supporting his claim, the points at issue and the relief or 
remedy sought, and the respondent shall state his defence 
in respect of these particulars, unless the parties have 
otherwise agreed as to the required elements of those 
statements.
(2) The parties may submit with their statements all 
documents they consider to be relevant or may add a 
reference to the documents or other evidence they will 
submit. 
(2A) The respondent, in support of his case, may also 
submit a counter-claim or plead a set-off, which shall be 
adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal, if such counter-
claim or set-off falls within the scope of the arbitration 
agreement.
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, either party 
may amend or supplement his claim or defence during 
the course of the arbitral proceedings, unless the arbitral 
tribunal considers it inappropriate to allow the amendment 
or supplement having regard to the delay in making it.”
It will be noticed that once the Arbitral Tribunal is constituted claims, 
defence and, counter claims are filed. Party which normally files the 
claim first is, for convenience, referred to as the ‘claimant’ and the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
331
M/s Bhagheeratha Engineering Ltd. v. State of Kerala
party which responds is called the ‘respondent’. The said respondent 
is also along with the defence statement entitled to file its counter 
claim. Hence, to contend that the appellant cannot be referred to 
as a claimant because no notice under Section 21 has been issued 
is completely untenable. To illustrate the point, the rules from the 
DIAC rules are set out: -
“DIAC Arbitration Proceedings Rules, 2018
2.1(g) “Claimant”, notwithstanding any nomenclature given 
to the parties in any Court in any proceeding between 
them, means the party which files the Statement of Claim 
first in point of time. The other party(ies) shall be referred 
to as “Respondent(s)”. The party filing Counter-Claim(s) 
shall be referred as “Counter-Claimant”.
21.	 The judgment cited by the respondent namely Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. v. 
Tiwari Road Lines7, and MSK Projects India (JV) Limited vs. State 
of Rajasthan and Another8, have no application to the facts of the 
case, as not only is there no breach of procedure in the appointment 
of Arbitral Tribunal, the Arbitral Tribunal has also not travelled beyond 
the scope of the reference. No other argument touching upon the 
merits of the award have been canvassed before us. 
22.	 For the reasons stated above, we set aside the judgment of the 
High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam dated 07.01.2025 in Arbitration 
Appeal No. 56/2012. The consequence will be that the award of the 
arbitrator dated 29.06.2006 is upheld in its entirety. The appeal is 
allowed. No order as to costs.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
7	
(2007) 5 SCC 703
8	
(2011) 10 SCC 573
