[2026] 1 S.C.R. 409 : 2026 INSC 38
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.  
v. 
Bhawana Mishra 
(Civil Appeal No. 14250 of 2025)
08 January 2026
[Rajesh Bindal* and Manmohan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as to whether on mere admission in a course, right 
is conferred for appointment on the post of Ayurvedic Staff Nurse.
Headnotes†
Service law – Appointment – Post of Ayurvedic Staff Nurse – 
Advertisement inviting application for the course of Ayurvedic 
Nursing Training – Respondent admitted and thereafter 
passed out from government institutions between 2015-
19 – Representation before the competent authority seeking 
appointment, however was rejected – Respondent then filed 
writ petition – Case of the appellant-State that earlier there 
were only 20 seats in one government college for imparting 
Ayurvedic Nursing Training Course, and after completion 
they were being given appointment, however post 2011, 
there was a change in policy, the permission was granted to 
number of private colleges to impart training in that course, 
and the availability of candidates for appointment on the 
post of Ayurvedic Staff Nurse was more, hence, due process 
of selection was required to be followed, and post was now 
required to be filled up by the UPSSSC – However, the High 
Court allowed the writ petition – Appeal thereagainst also 
dismissed – Correctness:
Held: Direction issued by the High Court mandating the State 
to consider the candidature of respondents for appointment as 
Ayurvedic Staff Nurse in a Medical College, Hospital or Dispensary 
under the State Government, cannot be legally sustained – Perusal 
of the advertisement inviting application for the course of Ayurvedic 
Nursing Training, shows that no promise had been made for 
* Author

410
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
appointment – Clause 9 in the advertisement clearly stipulated that 
only in case the candidate is appointed after training, he/she shall 
compulsorily serve the government for at least 5 years – Bond was 
only meant for the candidate selected for the government service – 
Principle of legitimate expectation cannot be applied as there was 
a change in policy and scheme of government – Existing facts and 
circumstances underwent a substantial shift from the year 2012, 
when the private institutions were granted permission to conduct the 
Ayurvedic Nursing Training Course, by way of government order – 
Candidates pursuing the said course had grown exponentially and 
all such candidates could not be recruited after training due to 
limited vacancies – Respondent-candidates failed to identify any 
specific clause in the advertisements for admission to the course 
that guarantees right to appointment upon admission – While 
advertisements for private colleges explicitly state that admission 
does not grant a right to appointment, the absence of this specific 
disclaimer in government college advertisements does not mean a 
right to appointment is automatically implied – Past practice was 
merely on the basis of the situation at the relevant time when 
there were only 20 seats for imparting education for Ayurvedic 
Nursing Training Course and only one government institution 
was authorized to conduct the course – Since there were more 
vacancies, most of them may have been adjusted – There were 
no appointments made by following the earlier system available – 
There was change in the process of selection as well, earlier the 
selection was being made by UPPSC, now it was being made by 
UPSSSC – After the change in policy of the government permitting 
private institutions to impart training for Ayurvedic Nursing Training 
Course, the availability of candidates was much more as compared 
to the earlier regime – Available vacancies with the government 
being less, the normal rule provides for a selection process to be 
followed so that the best available candidate is selected – Thus, 
no violation of Art. 14 as, there was no discrimination against the 
respondents or that the action of the State was arbitrary – Essence 
of discrimination is the unequal treatment of equals; however, the 
State clearly established that no appointments were made under 
the old system for any candidate admitted after the 2010-11 
session – Since no batchmates of the respondent, nor any other 
candidates passing out after the first private college in 2016, given 
direct appointments, no instance of similarly situated person being 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
411
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Bhawana Mishra
treated preferentially – Plea of discrimination factually and legally 
unsustainable – Thus, the impugned judgment of the High Court 
set aside. [Paras 19-21, 26-28]
Case Law Cited
N. Suresh Nathan and Anr. v Union of India and Ors [1991] 
Supp. 2 SCR 423 : (1992) Supp. 1 SCC 584; Sivanandan C T 
and Others v. High Court of Kerala and Others, 2023 INSC 709 : 
[2023] 11 SCR 674 – referred to.
List of Acts
United Provinces [Indian Medicines] Act, 1939; Uttar Pradesh Ayush 
Department (Ayurved) Nursing Service Rules, 2021.
List of Keywords
Admission; Appointment; Post of Ayurvedic Staff Nurse; 
Course of Ayurvedic Nursing Training; Government institutions; 
Representation before competent authority; Change in policy; 
Availability of candidates for appointment; Process of selection; 
Government service; Principle of legitimate expectation; Right to 
appointment upon admission; Discrimination; Unequal treatment 
of equals.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 14250  
of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 17.01.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in SPLA No. 214 of 2020
With
Civil Appeal No(s). 14251 and 14252 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Sakshi Kakkar, Mrigank Mishra, Ms. Gargi.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Varun Singh, Ms. Alankriti Dwivedi, Somesa Gupta, Shivam 
Sharma, Mudit Gupta, M Shaz Khan, Sudhanshu Tewari, Rafid 
Akhter, Faizan Ahmed, Talha Abdul Rahman.

412
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.	
This order will dispose of three appeals involving common questions 
of law and facts. 
2.	
The State is before this Court impugning the judgment dated 
17.01.2025 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court1 in 
Special Appeals2 filed by the State. The same were filed against 3 
different orders passed by the Single Bench of the High Court in 
Writ Petitions3 filed by the respondents.
3.	
For the purpose of consideration of the issues involved, we are 
noticing facts from Civil Appeal No. 14250 of 2025 (arising out of 
S.L.P.(C) No.19707 of 2025).
4.	
Taking us through the long history of facts of the case, learned 
counsel for the State submitted that vide Government Order dated 
12.11.1986, procedure for selection of candidates for Ayurvedic 
Nursing Training Course in the State was circulated. The selection 
procedure was specified which provided for written examination 
followed by an interview and the marks assigned for the same. Tone 
and tenor of the aforesaid order clearly established that the same 
was meant for selection of the candidates for the purpose of training 
for Ayurvedic Nursing Training Course and not for appointment. This 
was followed by another Government Order dated 22.04.2010. Earlier 
permission was being granted to continue with the aforesaid course 
on year-to-year basis. Realizing the need thereof, it was directed 
that no fresh permission was required every year.
4.1	 In the aforesaid backdrop, an advertisement was issued on 
23.09.2013 inviting applications for admissions to the Ayurvedic 
Nursing Training Course for the year 2013-14. The notice clearly 
suggested that for the aforesaid session, the admission was for 
20 seats in the Government Ayurvedic College and Hospital, 
1	
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench
2	
Special Appeal Nos.214 and 257 of 2020 and Special Appeal No.317 of 2021
3	
Service Single Nos. 12609 and 33476 of 2019 and Service Single No. 3415 of 2020

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
413
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Bhawana Mishra
Lucknow. Clause 9 of the advertisement provided that after 
completion of training, in case the government selects any 
candidate for mandatory service, it shall be incumbent for the 
candidate to serve the State at least for a period of 5 years 
from the date of appointment. The candidates had to submit a 
bond stating that after training, in case they are appointed by 
the State government, they shall compulsorily serve the State 
for at least 5 years. Upon failure to abide by this bond, the 
entire amount paid during the training period to the candidate 
was recoverable along with interest @12% per annum.
5.	
A development which had taken place just prior to the issuance of 
the aforesaid advertisement, as referred by the learned counsel 
for the State, was a notification dated 21.10.2011, specifying that 
Ayurvedic Nursing Training Course in Ayurvedic and General Nursing 
(Unani Nurses) shall now be conducted by the institutions both 
in the government and non-government sectors. The interested 
institutions were to seek permission for the same. After due process, 
15 institutions were granted permission in the meeting of the Board4 
held on 29.03.2012 to impart the aforesaid training. The permission 
was granted in exercise of powers under the United Provinces [Indian 
Medicines] Act, 1939. 
6.	
After this permission was granted, even the private institutions 
started admitting candidates for the aforesaid course. Consequently. 
the number of pass outs were much more than the vacancies and 
many times more than those who were earlier getting admission in 
the government institution.
7.	
Reference was made to the communication dated 23.12.2013, 
wherein the respondent was called for appearing in the written 
examination. Thereafter, vide letter dated 14.02.2024, she was notified 
about her selection and was required to appear and complete the 
formalities to be considered for admission in the Ayurvedic Nurses 
Training Session 2013-14.
8.	
Learned counsel have further referred to a notification dated 
15.12.2014 issued by the State directing that the selection process 
for the post carrying Pay Band-1 (Rs.5200-20200), Grade Pay 
4	
Board of Ayurvedic, Unani, and Tibbia, Systems of Medicine, Uttar Pradesh

414
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Rs.1900/- and above but below Pay Band-2 (Rs.9300-34800), 
Grade Pay Rs.4600/- shall come within the purview of Uttar Pradesh 
Subordinate Services Selection Commission.5 Notification further 
stated that for the posts aforementioned, the requisitions already 
forwarded to the Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission6 shall 
continue to be processed and finalized by the said Commission. For 
the present and future vacancies, this exercise shall be undertaken 
exclusively by the UPSSSC. It was submitted that at that relevant 
time there were no service rules notified for the post in question.
9.	
Further, the argument raised by learned counsel for the appellant 
is that when the respondents passed out, there was a change in 
the process of selection. By that time, number of private colleges 
having the requisite infrastructure for imparting Ayurvedic Nursing 
Training Course were granted permission to start the aforesaid 
course. The availability of candidates, thus, became more in number. 
Due selection process was required to be followed to select the 
best available candidates, as compared to the earlier times, when 
there were only 20 seats in the State for imparting education for the 
Ayurvedic Nursing Training Course. It is not denied that earlier, they 
were being given appointment.
10.	 After the respondent completed her training course in the year 
2017, it is claimed that she sent a representation to the competent 
authority seeking appointment. To expedite the decision thereon, 
the respondent filed Writ Petition7 before the High Court, seeking 
a direction for her appointment. The same was disposed of on 
19.07.2019 permitting the respondent/petitioner therein, to file a 
representation before the respondent No. 2 therein and the same 
was directed to be decided within a period of 3 months from the 
date of receipt of the copy of the said order. After due consideration, 
the representation made by the respondent/petitioner therein was 
rejected by the competent authority vide order dated 25.09.2019. 
The basis for the rejection was twofold: firstly, it was asserted that 
there were currently no notified service rules for Ayurvedic Nurses, 
and the matter of promulgation was under active consideration by 
5	
Hereinafter, “UPSSSC”
6	
Hereinafter, “UPPSC”
7	
Service Single No. 19652/2019

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
415
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Bhawana Mishra
the Government; secondly, reliance was placed on the notification 
dated 15.12.2014, stating that the pay scales for the post of Ayurvedic 
Staff Nurse had been revised, which now fall in Pay Band II (Rs. 
9300-34800) with Grade Pay of Rs. 4600. Due to this revised pay 
scale, the direct recruitment for this post fell within the purview of the 
UPSSSC. The competent authority concluded that a requisition for 
appointment could only be forwarded to the UPSSSC subsequent 
to the notification of the relevant service rules.
11.	 Another factor pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellant 
was that no appointments were made to the post of Ayurvedic Staff 
Nurses from 15.12.2014 except some appointments given in 2015. 
It encompassed candidates who had been admitted to the training 
course up to the year 2010-11. This is evident from the letter dated 
28.05.2015, brought on record by the appellant, which refers to an 
order passed by the High Court.
12.	 The aforesaid rejection order dated 25.09.2019 was challenged by 
the respondent by filing Writ Petition8 before the High Court. Definite 
stand taken by the State before the High Court was that mere 
admission in the course did not give any right of appointment. There 
was a change in policy. Permission had been granted to number of 
private colleges to impart training in that course. The availability of 
candidates for appointment on the post of Ayurvedic Staff Nurse was 
more. Hence, due process of selection was required to be followed. 
Further, the post was now required to be filled up by the UPSSSC.
13.	 The aforesaid Writ Petition was allowed by the High Court. Reference 
was made to the letter dated 28.05.2015 placed on record, which 
showed the relevant policy being followed for the previous batches 
and it further indicated that certain appointments had been made in 
the same manner even after the issuance of the government order 
dated 15.12.2014. 
14.	 The State preferred intra-court appeal.9 The same was dismissed 
vide the impugned order. The opinion of the High Court was that 
the case of the respondent falls within the principles of legitimate 
expectation as the erstwhile policy, which was in accordance with 
8	
Service Single No. 33476/2019
9	
Special Appeal No. 214/2020

416
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Government Order dated 12.11.1986, had been followed for number 
of years. The candidates who were admitted in the course were being 
appointed immediately after completion of their training. 
15.	 In the aforesaid factual matrix, learned counsel for the appellant 
argued that the government order issued on 12.11.1986 only provided 
a selection procedure for Ayurvedic Nursing Training course for the 
academic session commencing from 1986. The permission was only 
for imparting training. The condition in the advertisement regarding 
the five-year bond was only in case of selection for the post of 
Ayurvedic Nurse Staff but that did not entitle them for appointment. 
The condition of bond was applicable only for those who were 
selected and appointed. Earlier appointments were being given to all 
the candidates who passed the course of Ayurvedic Nursing Training 
as there were only 20 seats. Whereas after permission was granted 
to 15 private colleges to conduct the Ayurvedic Nursing Training, 
the number of available candidates increased manifold and proper 
process of selection was required to be followed to select the most 
competent candidates for the purpose of appointment. The issue 
of legitimate expectation will not be applicable in the case in hand 
as the process of selection changed later on. As opposed to the 
earlier regime, the selection was now required to be undertaken by 
the UPSSSC for the most suitable candidates. The appointments 
given in May 2015 were due to an order passed by the High Court 
in a Writ Petition and that will not give a right of appointment to 
the respondents. There may be few candidates before this court, 
however, there are number of petitions pending on the same issue 
in the High Court. Much water has flown after such candidates have 
passed out. They can very well compete, whenever the process 
of selection is notified, subject to their eligibility and thereafter, the 
meritorious candidates shall be selected.
16.	 On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent submitted 
that from the year 1972 till 2015, the process followed by the 
State was that whosoever got admission in the course was given 
appointment as an Ayurvedic Staff Nurse. The bond was required 
to be furnished at the time of the admission of the course itself. The 
respondents had passed out from a government institution and not 
from a private college. The language used in the advertisement 
issued for admission in a private college was different as it clearly 
specified that admission will not bind the Board of Ayurvedic and 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
417
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Bhawana Mishra
Unani Tibbi System of Medicine to offer government service to the 
trained candidates. Such a clause was missing in the advertisement 
issued in the present case at the time when the respondent had 
got admission. The respondent certainly had legitimate expectation 
at the time of admission in the course as the same system was 
being followed for decades. Only after seeing those batches, the 
respondent thought of choosing this career. Even the notification 
issued by the government on 15.12.2014 will not take away the right 
of the respondent. In fact, there was no change in the policy after 
the government order dated 20.11.2011. It is only that some private 
colleges were also granted permission to impart training of Ayurvedic 
Nursing course. The process of selection remained the same. In fact, 
the appointments made in the year 2015 even after the notification 
of 15.12.2014 clearly show that, the State was still continuing with 
the old process. The original policy remained the same even at the 
time of rejection of the representation of the respondent, regardless 
of the fact that certain private colleges had been granted permission 
to impart training for Ayurvedic Nursing course. The batches 
admitted up to 2013-14 prior to the notification dated 15.12.2014, 
certainly have right of legitimate expectation. He further referred to 
a communication of the government dated 29.02.1968 to submit 
that the trainees undergoing the training of Ayurvedic/Unani Nurses 
will be treated as on duty under the Fundamental Rule 9(6)(b) of 
the financial hand book Volume II Part II and they were to be paid 
travel allowances. In support of the argument, reliance was placed 
on the judgment of this Court in N. Suresh Nathan and Anr. Vs 
Union of India and Ors.10
17.	 Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant 
referred record.
18.	 Though the facts have been noticed in detail in the previous paras, 
still briefly, we reiterate the same. These may be relevant for 
consideration of the arguments raised by the learned counsel for 
the parties. From 1986 onwards, till certain private institutions were 
granted permission to impart training of Ayurvedic Nursing Course, 
the same was being conducted only by government institution11 with 
10	
(1992) Supp. 1 SCC 584
11	
Government Ayurvedic College and Hospital, located on Tulsidas Marg (also referred to as Turiyaganj) 
in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh.

418
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
intake of 20 students. At that time, the vacancies may have been 
more, so those were filled with the available candidates, who were 
given appointments. With the change in the policy vide notification 
dated 21.10.2011 even the private institutions were permitted to 
impart education for the aforesaid course. As a result, the number 
of pass outs increased. The first batch which passed out from the 
private college was in the year 2016. No doubt, the respondent had 
passed out from a government institution. However, the fact remains 
that when she passed out in the year 2017, there was a change in 
the policy. The selection to the post of Ayurvedic Staff Nurse was 
to be made by the UPSSSC. 
19.	 The issue arises as to whether mere admission in a course, right 
is conferred for appointment on the post of Ayurvedic Staff Nurse. 
A perusal of the advertisement inviting application for the course of 
Ayurvedic Nursing Training, shows that no such promise had been 
made. Rather, Clause 9 in the advertisement clearly stated that a 
candidate who is finally selected for the mandatory service-training 
by the State Government, shall have to execute a bond in the favour 
of the government. It stipulated that only in case the candidate 
is appointed after training, he/she shall compulsorily serve the 
government for at least 5 years. It is not that the bond was applicable 
for all the candidates. It was only meant for the candidate selected 
for the government service.
20.	 It is on record that the respondents in the present appeals passed out 
from government institutions between 2015-19. When the permission 
for imparting Ayurvedic Staff Nurse Training Course was initially 
granted in the year 2012, only 15 private colleges had started the 
course. However, as stated by the appellants in their appeals before 
the High Court, with the passage of time, precisely, by the year 2019-
20, nearly 311 institutions were conducting Ayurvedic Nursing Training 
Course. Thus, the number of pass outs had far outnumbered the 
available vacancies. As a result, it was impossible to recruit all the 
pass outs. Besides, appointing candidates passing out of government 
institutions and not offering the same to the candidates passing out 
of private institutions would have led to discrimination. 
21.	 It may be far-fetched to apply the principle of legitimate expectation 
to the case in hand as there was a change in policy and scheme 
of government. The existing facts and circumstances underwent a 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
419
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Bhawana Mishra
substantial shift from the year 2012, when the private institutions 
were granted permission to conduct the Ayurvedic Nursing Training 
Course, by way of government order dated 21.10.2011. As noted 
above, the candidates pursuing the aforesaid course had grown 
exponentially and all such candidates could not be recruited after 
training due to limited vacancies. Further, the respondent-candidates 
have failed to identify any specific clause in the advertisements for 
admission to the course that guarantees a right to appointment upon 
admission. While advertisements for private colleges explicitly state 
that admission does not grant a right to appointment, the absence of 
this specific disclaimer in government college advertisements does 
not mean a right to appointment is automatically implied. Further, it 
is pertinent to note that the notice for admission for 20 seats in the 
Ayurvedic Nursing Training course was issued by the government 
college itself whereas for a private institution, the notice was issued 
by the Board.
22.	 It is the definite case of the State that no appointments were made 
as per the old system when the State was offering appointments to 
the candidates who had passed out from the government institution. 
After the issuance of notification dated 15.12.2014, except for few 
appointments in the year 2015, no appointments were made. It was 
on account of order of Court. Those were also of the students who 
were admitted upto the session 2010-11, which is prior to issuance 
of notification dated 15.12.2014 as well as granting of permission to 
private institutions to impart training of the Ayurvedic Nursing course. 
Thereafter, the selections were made only by the UPSSSC as service 
rules for the post in question had also been notified vide the Uttar 
Pradesh Ayush Department (Ayurved) Nursing Service Rules, 2021, 
which came into force w.e.f. 18.11.2021.
23.	 As far as the judgment of N. Suresh Nathan case (supra), relied 
upon by learned counsel for the respondent, is concerned, the same 
deals with an issue where a long-standing practice of construction 
of service rules was sought to be upset. The issue considered in 
the aforesaid judgment is summed up in paragraph 2 thereof, which 
is extracted below:
“2. The dispute in the present case is whether a Diploma- 
holder Junior Engineer who obtains a Degree while in 
service becomes eligible for appointment as Assistant 

420
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Engineer by promotion on completion of three years’ service 
including therein the period of service prior to obtaining the 
Degree or the three years’ service as a Degree-holder for 
this purpose is to be reckoned from the date he obtains 
the Degree. The Diploma-holders contend that they are 
entitled to include the earlier period and would be eligible 
for promotion in this category on obtaining the Degree if 
the total period of service is three years inclusive of the 
earlier period. The Degreeholders contest this position and 
contend to the contrary. According to the Degree-holders, 
these are two distinct categories. In the first category are 
Degree-holders with three years’ service in the grade as 
Degree-holders, the period of three years being subsequent 
to the date of obtaining the Degree as in the case of the 
Junior Engineers who join the service with a Degree; and 
the other category is of Diploma-holders with six years’ 
experience.”
24.	 It was finally opined that the relevant recruitment rules must be 
interpreted to mean that the three years of service required in the 
grade of degree-holder is to be reckoned only from the date of 
obtaining the degree, as the department had consistently followed 
the practice of counting the three-year period only from the date 
the degree was obtained. The Court concluded that since this 
interpretation was legally tenable and supported by consistent past 
practice, it would be inappropriate to unsettle it.
25.	 The doctrine of legitimate expectation under the Indian Law was 
recently considered by a Constitution Bench of this Court in 
Sivanandan C T and Others vs. High Court of Kerala and Others12. 
While referring to various judgments of this Court, in paragraphs 43 
and 44 of the aforesaid judgment, this Court opined as under:
“43. The underlying basis for the application of the doctrine 
of legitimate expectation has expanded and evolved to 
include the principles of good administration. Since citizens 
repose their trust in the state, the actions and policies of 
the state give rise to legitimate expectations that the state 
12	
2023 INSC 709

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
421
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Bhawana Mishra
will adhere to its assurance or past practice by acting in 
a consistent, transparent, and predictable manner. The 
principles of good administration require that the decisions 
of public authorities must withstand the test of consistency, 
transparency, and predictability to avoid being regarded 
as arbitrary and therefore violative of Article 14. 
44. From the above discussion, it is evident that 
the doctrine of substantive legitimate expectation is 
entrenched in Indian administrative law subject to the 
limitations on its applicability in given factual situations. 
The development of Indian jurisprudence is keeping in line 
with the developments in the common law. The doctrine 
of substantive legitimate expectation can be successfully 
invoked by individuals to claim substantive benefits or 
entitlements based on an existing promise or practice of 
a public authority. However, it is important to clarify that 
the doctrine of legitimate expectation cannot serve as an 
independent basis for judicial review of decisions taken by 
public authorities. Such a limitation is now well recognized 
in Indian jurisprudence considering the fact that a legitimate 
expectation is not a legal right. It is merely an expectation 
to avail a benefit or relief based on an existing promise 
or practice. Although the decision by a public authority to 
deny legitimate expectation may be termed as arbitrary, 
unfair, or abuse of power, the validity of the decision itself 
can only be questioned on established principles of equality 
and non-arbitrariness under Article 14. In a nutshell, an 
individual who claims a benefit or entitlement based on 
the doctrine of legitimate expectation has to establish: (i) 
the legitimacy of the expectation; and (ii) that the denial of 
the legitimate expectation led to the violation of Article 14.”
26.	 Two tests have been laid down, one being the legitimacy of the 
expectation and second being denial of legitimate expectation that 
led to violation of Article 14. When the facts of the case are examined 
in the light of the enunciation of law in the aforesaid judgment of the 
Constitution Bench of this Court, may be, at the cost of petition, we 
need to add that in the case in hand, the past practice was merely 
on the basis of the situation at the relevant time when there were 
only 20 seats for imparting education for Ayurvedic Nursing Training 

422
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Course and only one government institution was authorized to conduct 
the course. Since there were more vacancies, most of them may 
have been adjusted. However, subsequently there was change in 
the policy as number of private institutions were permitted to impart 
education for the Ayurvedic Nursing Training Course. It is also on 
record that there were no appointments made by following the earlier 
system available after 15.12.2014, except few as is evident the letter 
dated 28.05.2015. It is evident therefrom that only the candidates 
who were admitted till the year 2010-11 were given appointment and 
that too due to Court order. The private colleges were permitted to 
impart education thereafter. 
27.	 Statutory rules governing the post had not been framed earlier, and 
the same came to be framed in the year 2021. There was change 
in the process of selection as well, namely, earlier the selection 
was being made by UPPSC, now it was being made by UPSSSC. 
Further, after the change in policy of the government permitting 
private institutions to impart training for Ayurvedic Nursing Training 
Course, the availability of candidates was much more as compared to 
the earlier regime where only 20 seats in the government institution 
were there. The available vacancies with the government being less, 
the normal rule provides for a selection process to be followed so 
that the best available candidate is selected. There is no violation of 
Article 14 as, in the facts of this case, it cannot be opined that there 
was any discrimination against the respondents or that the action of 
the State was arbitrary. The essence of discrimination is the unequal 
treatment of equals; however, the State has clearly established that 
no appointments were made under the old system for any candidate 
admitted after the 2010-11 session. Since no batchmates of the 
respondent, nor any other candidates passing out after the first private 
college batch in 2016, were given direct appointments, there is no 
instance of a similarly situated person being treated preferentially. 
The respondent has failed to point out a single candidate from her 
own batch or subsequent batches who was directly appointed by 
the State, thereby rendering the plea of discrimination factually and 
legally unsustainable.
28.	 For the reasons mentioned above, in our view, the direction issued 
by the High Court mandating the State to consider the candidature of 
respondents for appointment as Ayurvedic Staff Nurse in a Medical 
College, Hospital or Dispensary under the State Government, cannot 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
423
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Bhawana Mishra
be legally sustained and is set aside. The appeals are, accordingly, 
allowed, while setting aside the impugned judgment of the High Court.
29.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
