[2026] 1 S.C.R. 504 : 2026 INSC 8
NAK Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd.  
v. 
Tarun Keshrichand Shah and Ors. 
(Civil Appeal No(s). 46-47 of 2026)
05 January 2026
[Pankaj Mithal* and Prasanna B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Under challenge in these appeals is the judgment and order of the 
High Court dated 21.02.2022 setting aside the order of the court 
of first instance permitting impleadment of the appellant as one 
of the defendants to the suit.
Headnotes†
Suit – Recovery of service charges – A suit was instituted 
by respondent nos.1 and 2 against respondent no.3 for the 
recovery of service charges – Notice was served upon sole 
defendant i.e., respondent no.3 but no one appeared – The 
Court proceeded ex-parte – Thereafter, the appellant filed an 
application for being impleaded as the defendant in this suit 
contending that it is a successor of respondent no.3 – The 
court of first instance vide order dated 05.10.2018 allowed 
the motion to add the appellant as one of the defendants – 
However, the impleadment of the appellant was revoked by 
the High Court on the ground that it is not a proper or a 
necessary party to the suit – Correctness:
Held: The appellant has relied upon the Certificate of Incorporation 
dated 22.02.1988 to claim that it has succeeded the respondent 
no.3 – Its incorporation or its Certificate of Incorporation in no way 
conclusively proves that it has come into existence as a successor 
of respondent no.3 – In such circumstances, appellant cannot be 
accepted to be the successor of respondent no.3 so as to permit it 
to be impleaded and to defend the suit for the recovery of service 
charges – The appellant has nowhere established its independent 
right to be impleaded to defend the suit except for claiming to be 
the successor of respondent no.3 which, in opinion of this Court, 
* Author

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
505
NAK Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Tarun Keshrichand Shah and Ors.
has no legs to stand – In the case at hand, the respondent nos.1 
and 2 are not claiming any relief against the appellant – There is 
no iota of material to indicate that the relief, as claimed in the suit 
against respondent no.3, if granted, would be implemented against 
the appellant – Therefore, the appellant is not a necessary party 
to the suit – The appellant cannot also be construed as a proper 
party once it has failed to establish that it is a successor to the 
respondent no.3 – In the absence of any evidence to prove that 
respondent no.3 has ceased to exist or cannot be represented in the 
suit on its own to contest it on merits – This apart, the respondent 
nos.1 and 2 who have instituted the suit are dominus litis and it 
is for them to choose their adversaries – If they do not array the 
proper and necessary parties to the suit, they do it at their own 
risk – They cannot be compelled to add a party to defend a suit – 
Besides, the summons issued in the suit meant to be served upon 
respondent no.3, were served in the year 2008 – The seal and 
signatures on the acknowledgement on the said summons is of the 
appellant – However, the appellant kept silent – The impleadment 
application was filed almost after nine years of the knowledge – 
Thus, the impleadment has been rightly refused to the appellant 
by the High Court. [Paras 30, 31, 37, 38, 39, 42]
Case Law Cited
Ramesh Hirachand Kundanmal v. Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Bombay [1992] 2 SCR 1 : (1992) 2 SCC 524; Kasturi v. 
Iyyamperumal [2005] 3 SCR 864 : (2005) 6 SCC 733; Mumbai 
International Airport (P) Ltd. v. Regency Convention Centre & 
Hotels  (P) Ltd. [2010] 7 SCR 790 : (2010) 7 SCC 417; Vidur 
Impex & Traders (P) Ltd. v. Tosh Apartments (P) Ltd. [2012] 10 
SCR 307 : (2012) 8 SCC 384; Kanaklata Das v. Naba Kumar Das 
[2018] 1 SCR 806 : (2018) 2 SCC 352 – relied on.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Companies Act, 1956.
List of Keywords
Dominus Litis; Necessary Party; Proper Party; Privity of 
Contract; Successor-in-Interest; Impleadment; Inordinate Delay;  
Ex-Parte.

506
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 46-47 of 
2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.02.2022 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in WP Nos. 3455 and 3456 of 2019
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Chander Uday Singh, Sr. Adv., Amarjit Singh Bedi, Ms. Surekha 
Raman, Harshit Singh, Sidharth Nair, Shreyash Kumar, M/s K J 
John And Co.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Abhinav Chandrachud, Surjendu Sankar Das, Ms. Annie Mittal, 
Janay Jain, Ms. Yugandhara Pawar Jha, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, 
Aaditya Aniruddha Pande.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
We have heard Shri Chander Uday Singh, senior counsel assisted 
by Shri Amarjit Singh Bedi, Advocate-on-Record for the appellant-
NAK Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd.1 and Dr. Abhinav Chandrachud, 
learned counsel assisted by Shri Surjendu Sankar Das, Advocate-
on-Record for the respondent No.1- Tarun Keshrichand Shah2.
3.	
Respondent No.2- Priyalata Keshrichand Shah3 is reported to be 
dead and her interest is represented by respondent No.1.
4.	
Respondent No.3- M/s Kishore Engineering Company4 has not 
appeared. It had not even appeared in the Trial Court or the High 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘appellant’
2	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘respondent No.1’
3	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘respondent No.2’
4	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘respondent No.3’

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
507
NAK Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Tarun Keshrichand Shah and Ors.
Court. It has not even filed any written statement, despite service 
of notice. 
5.	
In a Suit No.6117 of 2007 filed by respondent No.1 and respondent 
No.2 against respondent No.3, a Notice of Motion No.1346 of 2018 
was moved to add the appellant as the party defendant to participate 
and contest the aforesaid suit. Earlier, a Notice of Motion No. 1925 
of 2017 was also moved by the appellant seeking to set aside the 
order to proceed in the said suit ex-parte. Both the said motions 
were allowed by the court of first instance vide a common Order 
dated 05.10.2018. However, the said order was set aside by the 
High Court by the impugned judgment and order dated 21.02.2022 
in exercise of its power under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. 
6.	
Under challenge in these appeals is thus the above judgment and 
order of the High Court dated 21.02.2022 setting aside the order of 
the court of first instance permitting impleadment of the appellant as 
one of the defendants to the suit meaning thereby that the motion 
of addition of the appellant as one of the defendants to the suit 
stands rejected. 
7.	
One Keshrichand Shah was the original owner of the commercial 
premises admeasuring 1700 sq. feet existing on the third floor of 
the Churchgate House, Mumbai. He was the sole proprietor of M/s 
Union Commercial Corporation. The aforesaid Keshrichand Shah 
through its proprietorship firm M/s Union Commercial Corporation 
let out an area of 525 square feet of the above premises having five 
cabins to one M/s Modern Products Pvt. Ltd. The said M/s Modern 
Products Pvt. Ltd. licensed or sublet the same to the respondent 
no.3. In addition to the rent of Rs.400/- per month payable to M/s 
Modern Products Pvt. Ltd., the respondent No.3 also used to pay 
service charges at the rate of Rs.2,100/- per month for the use of 
furniture and fixtures therein to the owner, Keshrichand Shah. On 
the death of Kesharichand Shah, the said service charges were 
realized by his heirs, i.e., respondent nos.1 and 2.
8.	
The respondent Nos.1 and 2 instituted a Suit No.3319 of 2007 on 
the original civil side of the Bombay High Court but on account of 
pecuniary jurisdiction it was later transferred to the Bombay City Civil 
Court and re-numbered as Suit No.6117 of 2017. 

508
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
9.	
The aforesaid suit was instituted by respondent Nos.1 and 2 against 
respondent No.3 for the recovery of service charges at the rate 
of Rs.2,100/- per month, amounting to Rs.75,600/- for the period 
November 2004 to October 2007. 
10.	 In the aforesaid suit, notice was served upon sole defendant i.e., 
respondent no.3 but no one appeared on its behalf and filed any 
written statement. Thus, after closing the evidence on 11.02.2014, the 
court vide order dated 12.11.2014 proceeded ex-parte in the matter. 
11.	 It was much thereafter on 02.04.2018 that the appellant filed 
an application for being impleaded as the defendant in this suit 
contending that it is a successor of respondent No.3 under Part IX 
of the Companies Act, 1956. The appellant is actually running the 
business of respondent No.3. Therefore, it is a necessary party to 
the suit. 
12.	 The appellant contended that it had acquired knowledge of the suit 
only on 02.10.2012 and that it has proceeded ex-parte against the 
respondent No.3. There was no proper service of the notice upon 
the respondent No.3 or upon the appellant. It was contended that the 
appellant has drawn separate proceedings for getting the ex-parte 
order set aside. The appellant had no knowledge of the transfer of 
the suit from the Bombay High Court to the City Civil Court as no 
notice in this regard was received or served upon it.
13.	 It may be not out of context to mention here that the respondent 
Nos.1 and 2 apart from instituting the above suit had also filed a 
suit for the eviction of the respondent No.3 and the appellant and its 
Directors from the premises in dispute in the Small Causes Court. 
This apart, a criminal complaint was also lodged against the appellant 
and its Director–Himanshu Patwa on account of dishonour of two 
cheques of Rs.2,100/- and Rs.400/- issued by them in respect of 
the monthly service charges and the rent respectively in connection 
with the demised premises. 
14.	 It is in the above background that the court of first instance vide 
order dated 05.10.2018 allowed the motion to add the appellant as 
one of the defendants to the suit observing that there is no dispute 
to the fact that the appellant is in occupation of the suit premises. 
The suit premises was initially let out to the respondent No.3 and 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
509
NAK Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Tarun Keshrichand Shah and Ors.
is now in possession of appellant, who claims to be the successor 
company that has taken over the business of respondent No.3. 
The certificate of incorporation relied upon by the appellant along 
with the Memorandum of Association prima facie reveals that the 
appellant has taken over and acquired the business interest of the 
respondent No.3. The court accepted the said certificate issued by 
the Registrar of the companies opining that it lacked jurisdiction to 
rule on the validity of the said certificate. 
15.	 The aforesaid order of the court of first instance on being taken up 
before the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution has been 
reversed and the impleadment of the appellant has been revoked 
on the ground that it is not a proper or a necessary party to the suit. 
The suit will not fail for want of its presence. 
16.	 The High Court proceeded to pass the impugned order on the 
premise that no relationship of tenant and landlord existed between 
the parties and that the appellant is the unauthorized occupant that 
need not be joined as a defendant to the suit.
17.	 The High Court further held that the issue of recovery of arrears of 
service charges can be decided even in the absence of the appellant 
as the respondent No.3 had no legal sanctity of law to authorize the 
use of furniture and fixtures to a third party. 
18.	 It is alleged that the High Court completely ignored the fact that the 
appellant is the successor company of the tenant– respondent No.3 
whose complete business has been taken over by it. The appellant has 
stepped into the shoes of respondent No.3 and was in possession of 
the premises in that capacity and was not an unauthorized occupant. 
19.	 It is in this background that we have been called upon to consider 
to decide whether the appellant is a necessary and proper party to 
be impleaded in the suit No.6117 of 2007 for the recovery of service 
charges in respect of the premises in dispute which was admittedly 
sublet to the respondent No.3 to whose business the appellant 
happens to be a successor. 
20.	 The first and the foremost argument of Shri Chander Uday Singh, 
senior counsel appearing for the appellant is that the High Court 
exceeded its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution in 
setting aside the judgment and order of the court of first instance 

510
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
as if it is sitting in appeal. The order of the Trial Court allowing the 
impleadment was an interlocutory order which required no interference 
by the High Court in exercise of its supervisory power. The High Court 
incorrectly concluded that the appellant is not a necessary party 
to the suit, completely ignoring the fact that the respondent Nos.1 
and 2 themselves had arrayed it as one of the defendants in a suit 
for eviction from the premises filed before the Small Causes Court. 
The High Court also erred in not appreciating that the appellant is 
a successor to respondent No.3 under the Companies Act and that 
the validity of the certificate of registration issued by the Registrar of 
Companies in favour of the appellant could not have been adjudicated 
while exercising powers under Article 227 of the Constitution. 
21.	 It is further contended that the appellant has been paying service 
charges through cheque since 1991 and the respondent nos.1 and 2 
were aware of it. Rather, the service charges from 2004 were received 
by the respondent Nos.1 and 2, implying an admission on their part that 
the appellant is the person liable to pay the same. Even the furniture 
and telephone lines in the premises, which existed, have been used 
by the appellant since 1991 with the knowledge of the respondent 
No.1. Therefore, the High Court was not right in holding that since 
there is no relationship of tenant and landlord between the parties, 
the appellant is not a necessary party. The relationship of tenant and 
landlord in the matter was not relevant and material, as it was not a 
suit for eviction rather a suit for recovery of service charges.
22.	 He further argued that, in fact, any decree that may be passed in 
the suit in question against the respondent No.3 that is practically 
defunct, would lead to execution of the decree against the appellant 
and as such the appellant is a necessary and proper party to the suit. 
23.	 Dr. Abhinav Chandrachud, learned counsel appearing for the 
respondent No.1 in defense submits that the appellant has not come 
up before the court with clean hands rather with an ulterior motive 
to legitimize its illegal occupation over the premises in dispute. The 
summons in the suit were served upon the respondent No.3 way 
back in the year 2008. The acknowledgement bears the signature 
and the stamp of the appellant which clearly proves that the appellant 
was aware of the institution of the suit but even then, remained silent 
for over nine years before seeking impleadment. The appellant is 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
511
NAK Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Tarun Keshrichand Shah and Ors.
an unauthorized occupant of the premises in dispute and therefore, 
in the suit for eviction, was made one of the defendants so that the 
eviction decree if any may be effectively executed. However, this 
does not mean that it is also a necessary and proper party to the 
present suit for the recovery of arrears of service charges. 
24.	 Further, the certificate of incorporation of the appellant is not a proof 
of successorship to the respondent No.3 and that the certificate 
annexed with the appeal is a new and different document which was 
not part of the record before the courts below. The respondent No.3 
still continues to be a registered company and is still in existence 
and therefore, the appellant cannot be accepted to be its successor 
more particularly when it is only a firm and not even a company. 
25.	 Lastly, it has been submitted that the respondent Nos.1 and 2 who 
instituted the suit are dominus litis in the matter and cannot be 
compelled to add a defendant against their wishes if they do not 
desire to seek any relief against such a person.
26.	 Undisputedly, the suit in question has been filed by the owners of the 
property to recover service charges for the use of furniture and fixtures 
from the respondent No.3 that was inducted as a sub-tenant in the 
premises in dispute by M/s Modern Products Pvt. Ltd. The dispute 
is not regarding recovery of rent or arrears of rent. Therefore, the 
relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties is completely 
alien to the controversy in question.
27.	 The dispute is essentially with regard to payment of service charges 
between the owners of the property and its user i.e. respondent No.3. 
Therefore, no other person has any right to be impleaded so as to 
defend the suit regarding payment of service charges.
28.	 The appellant claims to be the successor of respondent No.3 and as 
such, wants to defend the suit on its behalf or as its representative.
29.	 The respondent No.3, though stated to be a private limited company, 
is only a partnership firm having only four members. There is no 
authentic proof on record that the above partnership firm was ever 
converted into a company. The conversion of a partnership firm into a 
company as under Part IX of Companies Act, 1956 requires fulfilment 
of strict conditions such as having at least seven partners/members 
and execution of certain deeds. The respondent No.3 was having 

512
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
only four partners and as such was ineligible for conversion under the 
relevant law. Further, there is nothing on record to indicate that the 
aforesaid firm respondent No.3 has ceased to exist or has become 
extinct. The extract of respondent No.3 firm dated 20.09.2016 from 
the office of the Registrar of Firms reveals that respondent No.3 
continues to exist as a partnership firm even though appellant may 
have been incorporated as a new company.
30.	 The appellant has relied upon the Certificate of Incorporation dated 
22.02.1988 to claim that it has succeeded the respondent No.3. No 
doubt, a company comes into existence as a body corporate from the 
date of its incorporation having perpetual succession and a common 
seal. However, its incorporation or its Certificate of Incorporation 
in no way conclusively proves that it has come into existence as 
a successor of respondent No.3. In such circumstances, appellant 
cannot be accepted to be the successor of respondent No.3 so as 
to permit it to be impleaded and to defend the suit for the recovery 
of service charges. 
31.	 The appellant has nowhere established its independent right to be 
impleaded to defend the suit except for claiming to be the successor 
of respondent No.3 which, in our opinion, has no legs to stand.
32.	 The above discussion takes us to another aspect of the matter as to 
whether the appellant is a necessary or a proper party to be impleaded. 
The governing principles and law in this regard are well-settled. 
33.	 The fundamental distinction between a “necessary party” and a 
“proper party” was succinctly explained in Ramesh Hirachand 
Kundanmal v. Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay5, wherein 
this Court held:
“6… A necessary party is one without whom no order can 
be made effectively. A proper party is one in whose absence 
an effective order can be made but whose presence is 
necessary for a complete and final decision on the question 
involved in the proceeding.”
5	
(1992) 2 SCC 524

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
513
NAK Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Tarun Keshrichand Shah and Ors.
34.	 In Kasturi v. Iyyamperumal 6, this Court crystallized the twin tests 
for a necessary party: 
“…the question of jurisdiction of the court to invoke Order 1 
Rule 10 CPC to add a party who is not made a party in the 
suit by the plaintiff shall not arise unless a party proposed 
to be added has direct and legal interest in the controversy 
involved in the suit. … two tests are to be satisfied for 
determining the question as to who is a necessary party. 
The tests are: (1) there must be a right to some relief 
against such party in respect of the controversies involved 
in the proceedings; (2) no effective decree can be passed 
in the absence of such party.”
35.	 This principle has been consistently reiterated. In Mumbai 
International Airport (P) Ltd. v. Regency Convention Centre & 
Hotels (P) Ltd.7, this Court reiterated:
“15. A “necessary party” is a person who ought to have been 
joined as a party and in whose absence no effective decree 
could be passed at all by the court. If a “necessary party” 
is not impleaded, the suit itself is liable to be dismissed. 
A “proper party” is a party who, though not a necessary 
party, is a person whose presence would enable the court 
to completely, effectively and adequately adjudicate upon 
all matters in dispute in the suit, though he need not be a 
person in favour of or against whom the decree is to be 
made. If a person is not found to be a proper or necessary 
party, the court has no jurisdiction to implead him, against 
the wishes of the plaintiff. The fact that a person is likely 
to secure a right/interest in a suit property, after the suit 
is decided against the plaintiff, will not make such person 
a necessary party or a proper party to the suit for specific 
performance.”
36.	 Thereafter, in Vidur Impex & Traders (P) Ltd. v. Tosh Apartments (P) 
Ltd.8, the broad principles governing impleadment were summarized:
6	
(2005) 6 SCC 733
7	
(2010) 7 SCC 417
8	
(2012) 8 SCC 384

514
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“41.2. A necessary party is the person who ought to be 
joined as party to the suit and in whose absence an effective 
decree cannot be passed by the court.
41.3. A proper party is a person whose presence would 
enable the court to completely, effectively and properly 
adjudicate upon all matters and issues, though he may 
not be a person in favour of or against whom a decree 
is to be made.
41.4. If a person is not found to be a proper or necessary 
party, the court does not have the jurisdiction to order his 
impleadment against the wishes of the plaintiff.”
37.	 In the case at hand, the respondent Nos.1 and 2 are not claiming any 
relief against the appellant. There is no iota of material to indicate 
that the relief, as claimed in the suit against respondent No.3, if 
granted, would be implemented against the appellant. Therefore, 
the appellant is not a necessary party to the suit.
38.	 The appellant cannot also be construed as a proper party once it 
has failed to establish that it is a successor to the respondent No.3. 
In the absence of any evidence to prove that respondent No.3 has 
ceased to exist or cannot be represented in the suit on its own to 
contest it on merits, we are of the opinion that the appellant is not 
even a proper party to provide any assistance to the court in the suit. 
39.	 This apart, the respondent Nos.1 and 2 who have instituted the suit 
are dominus litis and it is for them to choose their adversaries. If they 
do not array the proper and necessary parties to the suit, they do it 
at their own risk. However, they cannot be compelled to add a party 
to defend a suit against their wishes. The decree, if any, passed in 
the suit would be binding only between the parties to the suit and 
would not infringe upon any right of a third party, much less of the 
appellant that is not a party to the suit.
40.	 This conclusion is reinforced by the fundamental principle laid down 
in Kanaklata Das v. Naba Kumar Das9, wherein this Court has 
observed:
9	
(2018) 2 SCC 352

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
515
NAK Engineering Company Pvt. Ltd. v.  
Tarun Keshrichand Shah and Ors.
“11.4. …the plaintiff being a dominus litis cannot be 
compelled to make any third person a party to the suit, be 
that a plaintiff or the defendant, against his wish unless 
such person is able to prove that he is a necessary party to 
the suit and without his presence, the suit cannot proceed 
and nor can be decided effectively. In other words, no 
person can compel the plaintiff to allow such person to 
become the co-plaintiff or defendant in the suit. It is more 
so when such person is unable to show as to how he is a 
necessary or proper party to the suit and how without his 
presence, the suit can neither proceed and nor it can be 
decided or how his presence is necessary for the effective 
decision of the suit.
11.5. … a necessary party is one without whom, no order 
can be made effectively, a proper party is one in whose 
absence an effective order can be made but whose 
presence is necessary for a complete and final decision 
on the question involved in the proceeding.”
41.	 In the above facts and circumstances, if the High Court, for one 
reason or the other, has set aside the order of impleadment passed 
by the court of first instance, we do not consider it to be illegal so 
as to set it aside and restore the order of the Trial Court. 
42.	 There is one another reason for not interfering with the impugned 
judgment and order of the High Court. The summons issued in the 
suit meant to be served upon respondent No.3, were served in 
the year 2008. The seal and signatures on the acknowledgement 
on the said summons is of the appellant which clearly indicates 
that the appellant had acquired knowledge of the suit in the year 
2008. However, the appellant kept silent and moved the motion for 
impleadment only after the evidence was closed in the year 2014 
and the court had directed to proceed ex-parte in the matter. The 
impleadment application was filed almost after nine years of the 
knowledge of the pendency of the suit. Thus, the impleadment has 
been rightly refused to the appellant by the High Court. 
43.	 We are conscious of the fact that the jurisdiction of the High Court 
under Article 227 is simply supervisory in nature and that the High 

516
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Court ought not to have intervened in the matter. However, once 
the order has been interfered with, and rightly so, we do not wish 
to commit another illegality by restoring an incorrect order passed 
by the court of first instance.
44.	 In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that the 
appeals lack merit and are dismissed but with the direction that the 
decree passed in the suit would not be used against the appellant 
and would not be implemented against it.
45.	 The appeals are dismissed with no order as to cost.
46.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
