[2026] 1 S.C.R. 332 : 2026 INSC 21
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others 
v. 
State of Gujarat & Others
(Civil Appeal No. 6130 of 2016)
06 January 2026
[B.V. Nagarathna* and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the High Court was justified in dismissing 
the writ petitions by not applying s.4 of the Repealing Act and 
thereby not granting relief to the appellants; was the delivery of 
notice u/s.10(5) of the ULC Act to the appellants (as possessors 
of the concerned lands) a mandatory step, the non-fulfilment of 
which would render abatement of the proceedings in terms of s.4 
of the Repealing Act; and that despite the recording of lands in 
the name of the State Government, if actual possession was not 
subsequently transferred to the Government, would this render 
the proceedings to abate u/s.4 of the Repealing Act.
Headnotes†
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 – ss.6(1), 10(5), 
10(6), 21 – Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Repeal Act, 
1999 – ss.3, 4 – Acquisition of vacant land in excess of ceiling 
limit – Requirement of issuance of notice to possessors – Land 
admeasuring 9303 square metres belonged to the heir as its 
true owner and occupier – Order by the competent authority 
that the land in question was exempt u/s.21 and the remaining 
land was within the ceiling limit and was not excess land – In 
a public auction, land was purchased by a Society and issued 
possession receipts to multiple sub-plot holders including the 
appellant – Assistant Collector cancelled the mutation entry, 
thereafter, the order was challenged before various forums 
and finally the Competent Authority passed an order declaring 
662.18 sq. metres as excess land – On the cancellation of 
the auction purchase, the original landowner, entered into a 
registered agreements of sale for the sub-plots in favour of 
* Author

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
333
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
the sub-plot holders/appellants, and the appellants became 
owners and came into possession of sub-plots – Notice 
u/s.10(5) issued only to original landholder directing him to 
vacate and handover possession of the “excess land” to the 
respondent-State – Since possession was not surrendered, 
the Deputy Collector directed taking over of possession of 
the excess land – Sub-plot holders tried to resell their sub-
plots, the Competent Authority refused to grant NOCs – Writ 
petitions by the appellants before High Court dismissed as 
also appeals thereagainst – Correctness: 
Held: Requirement of issuance of notice u/s.10(5) is mandatory 
and must be issued to the persons actually in possession of the 
concerned land – This is clear from the wording of the statute-
order any person who may be in possession of it – Importance 
of delivering notice lay in avoiding a situation where a person is 
“dispossessed” without notice which would be in violation of the 
principles of natural justice, thereby clearly envisioning that the 
possessor must be served with notice – As per the provisions of 
s.10(3) and 10(5), the subject land, despite having ‘vested’ in the 
State Government, was not in the possession of the Government – 
Possesion of the land continued with the appellant – Proviso to 
s.4 not applicable and the benefit of abatement under the section 
would apply – Legislative intent is that in cases where lands 
were deemed to have been vested but possession was not yet 
transferred as on date of enforcement of the Repealing Act, the 
lands were to remain in possession of the private parties – Vesting 
and possession are distinct and that without the latter, the private 
parties have a claim over continuing to be in possession – On 
the date of issuance of notice, the appellants as possessors did 
not receive the notice – It was sent to the erstwhile owner of the 
subject land – This also implies that the respondents also were 
aware of the fact that actual possession was not with them and 
there was a need to issue notice u/s.10(5) before taking over actual 
possession – However, the respondents did not ascertain as to in 
whose name actual possession stood – Thus, no notice was issued 
to the appellants and hence there being no transfer of possession 
in accordance with s.10, it continues with the appellants both in 
fact as well as in law – Hence, entitled to the benefit of s.4 of the 
Repealing Act as they do not fall within the scope of s.3 of the said 
Act which is the savings clause – Omission to issue notice to the 

334
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
appellants violated the mandatory requirement of serving notice 
u/s.10(5) and meant that the legal process of acquiring possession 
was still ongoing, leading to abatement of proceedings u/s.4 of the 
Repealing Act on its enforcement – Abatement of proceedings is 
by operation of law based on the facts of each case and once the 
proceedings u/s.10 abate, the consequential reliefs would have to 
be granted to the appellants – Hence, the appellants entitled to all 
consequential reliefs pursuant to the abatement of the proceedings 
u/s.4 of the Repealing Act as the case of the appellants squarely 
falls within the scope of the provision – Division Bench of the High 
Court not right in holding that the appellants not in possession 
of the subject land on the date on which the ULC Act came into 
force and were illegal occupants; and that although the electricity 
bills showed the name of the appellants, it did not establish their 
possession u/s.10(5) – Impugned orders of the High Court set 
aside. [Paras 18.1, 18.3, 19.2-19.4, 22 22.1-22.9, 23] 
Case Law Cited
C. Albert Morris v. K. Chandrasekaran [2005] Supp. 4 SCR 779 : 
(2006) 1 SCC 228; State of Assam v. Bhaskar Jyoti Sarma [2014] 
14 SCR 1451 : (2015) 5 SCC 321; Mangalsen v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh (2014) 15 SCC 332; Gajanan Kamlya Patil v. Additional 
Collector & Competent Authority [2014] 1 SCR 1032 : (2014) 12 
SCC 523; State of Orissa v. Sakhi Bewa [2021] 10 SCR 1105 : 
(2022) 16 SCC 594 – referred to.
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Hari Ram [2013] 2 SCR 301 : (2013) 4 
SCC 280; AP Electrical Equipment Corporation v. Tahsildar [2025] 
2 SCR 1625 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 447; U.A. Basheer v. State 
of Karnataka [2021] 1 SCR 893 : (2021) 5 SCC 313 – relied on.
List of Acts
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976; Urban Land 
(Ceiling and Regulation) Repeal Act, 1999; Gujarat Land Revenue 
Rules, 1972.
List of Keywords
Excess vacant land; Vesting; Possession; Paper possession; de 
jure and de facto possession; Effect of the Repealing Act; Notice; 
Abatement of proceedings; Mandatory notice; Natural justice; 
Person in possession; Forced dispossession.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
335
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 6130 of 2016
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.07.2014 of the High Court 
of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in LPA No. 2024 of 2010 and SCA No. 
533 of 2009
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
K.K. Trivedi, Rabin Majumder, Krishna Yadav.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Deepanwita Priyanka, Anuj Chaudhary.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Nagarathna, J.
This civil appeal assails the impugned judgment dated 23.07.2014 
passed by the High Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in LPA 
No.2024/2010 in Special Civil Application No.533/2009 wherein the 
appeal filed by the appellants herein was dismissed.
Factual Backdrop:
2.	
The facts of the case are that the land in question is admeasuring 
9303 square metres and bearing Survey No. 339 of Town Planning 
Scheme No.4, Final Plot Nos.9A and 9B of Village Katargam, Surat, 
Gujarat (for short, “Survey 339”). According to the appellants, the 
said land belonged to one Nathubhai Ranchhodbhai, upon whose 
death in the year 1933, his heir Kuberbhai Nathubhai became its 
true owner and occupier. 
2.1	 On 17.02.1976, the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 
1976 (“ULC Act”, for the sake of convenience) came into force. 
Section 6(1) of the said Act directed every person holding 
vacant land in excess of the ceiling limit to file a statement 
specifying the location, extent, value and such other particulars 
of all vacant lands held by him. Accordingly, on 12.08.1976, 

336
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Kuberbhai Nathubhai filed a Form under Section 6(1) of the 
ULC Act declaring the following lands of Katargam, Surat under 
his holding:
Sl. 
No.
Survey No.
Area (square 
metre)
Type of Use
1.
470/1 paiki
23168
Agricultural
2.
472 paiki
3035
Agricultural
3.
472 paiki
11331
Agricultural
4.
Residence House No. 
1355 in Ward No. 15
111-484
Residential
2.2	 Thereafter, on 18.02.1980, the Competent Authority under the 
ULC Act (for short, “Competent Authority-I”) passed an order 
holding that lands bearing Survey Nos. 479 and 472/p were 
exempt under Section 21 of the ULC Act, which stated that 
excess vacant land shall not be treated as excess in certain 
cases. The order also held that the remaining land of Survey 
No.339 was within the ceiling limit, so there was “no excess 
land” being held by the family members of Kuberbhai Nathubhai. 
The respondents contended that the form filled earlier under 
Section 6(1) was not processed and was kept pending. 
2.3	 Thereafter, one Khodidas Kanjibhai Patel, the organiser of 
Sardar Hira Udhyog Sahakari Mandali Ltd. (for short, “the 
Society”) purchased the lands of Survey No.339 at a public 
auction held by the Special Recovery Officer on 28.04.1981. By 
order dated 28.05.1981, the officer confirmed the auction, and 
directed that the name of the Society be entered in the records 
of rights. Accordingly, the name of the Society was entered in 
the revenue records by Mutation Entry No.7068 on 16.05.1983. 
Thereafter, Khodidas Kanjibhai Patel obtained Construction 
Permission (for short, “Raja Chitthi”) on 13.12.1983 from the 
Surat Municipal Corporation for constructing industrial units for 
the Society. Khodidas Patel then issued Possession Receipts 
(for short, “Kabja Receipts”) to multiple sub-plot holders, the 
appellants herein, who have remained in possession of the said 
sub-plots since the year 1983-84.
2.4	 However, on 12.10.1984, the Assistant Collector, Choryasi 
Prant, passed an order cancelling Mutation Entry No.7068 dated 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
337
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
16.05.1983, inter alia, on the basis that the public auction dated 
28.04.1981 was not conducted according to the provisions of 
the ULC Act. This order was challenged before the Collector, 
Choryasi Prant in Appeal No.152/1985, which passed an order 
dated 16.01.1986 upholding the original order dated 12.10.1984 
of the Assistant Collector. The order of the Collector was in turn 
challenged before the Assistant Secretary, Revenue Department 
in Revision under Rule 108(6A) of the Gujarat Land Revenue 
Rules, 1972. By order dated 07.04.1986, said Revision was 
dismissed thereby upholding the order dated 16.01.1986 passed 
by the Collector in Appeal No.152/1985.
2.5	 On 03.05.1988, the Government of Gujarat exercised its powers 
of revision under Section 34 of the ULC Act and set aside the 
order dated 18.02.1980 passed by the Competent Authority-I, 
and remanded the matter to the Competent Authority & Additional 
Collector, ULC, Surat (for short, “Competent Authority-II”) for 
reconsideration of the question of “excess land” with regard to 
the subject land Survey No.339. Thereafter, on 16.01.1989, the 
Competent Authority-II passed an order declaring that 662.18 
square metres out of the total area of 9303 square metres of 
the subject land in Survey No.339 – Final Plot Nos. 9A and 9B 
was ‘excess land’.
2.6	 According to the appellants, in the order dated 16.01.1989, the 
cancellation of the mutation entry was specifically mentioned. 
However, they were not served with any notice by the Competent 
Authority-II, though they were the unit holders (sub-plot holders), 
and were in actual physical and legal possession of the said 
units. Furthermore, none of them was made a party before the 
Competent Authority-II, despite being in possession. 
2.7	 Therefore, on the cancellation of the auction purchase in favour 
of Khodidas Kanjibhai Patel the original landowner, Kuberbhai 
Nathubhai, entered into a registered agreements of sale for the 
sub-plots in favour of the sub-plot holders/appellants herein, 
and hence the appellants became owners and came into 
possession of sub-plot Nos.1 to 77 situated upon Survey No.339. 
According to the appellants, majority of them are engaged in 
the business of diamond cutting and polishing, while a few of 
them are engaged in different businesses, such as embroidery 
and other small businesses. 

338
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2.8	
On 22.11.1990, a notice under Section 10(5) of the ULC 
Act was issued to the original landholder directing him to 
vacate and handover possession of the “excess land” to the 
respondent/State Government within a period of thirty days. 
Since possession was not surrendered, the Deputy Collector, 
ULC drew Panchnama dated 21.01.1992, directing taking 
over possession of the ‘excess land’ to the tune of 662.18 
square metres out of the total area of the land admeasuring 
9303 square metres. In the said order, it was also observed 
that the said excess land is “open on the site” and that the 
possession of the same has been taken by the Competent 
Authority and Deputy Collector, ULC.
2.9	
When some of the sub-plot holders tried to resell their sub-
plots, the Competent Authority-II sent letters dated 20.06.2007 
and 05.07.2008 refusing to grant ‘No Objection Certificates’ 
(for short, “NOCs”) for the subsequent sale, on the ground that 
the constructed units were situated over the alleged ‘excess 
land’ as the said surplus land was taken over and therefore 
vested in the government since 21.01,1992. The appellants 
contended that this was the first time it came to their knowledge 
that the said property had been declared as ‘excess land’ by 
the Competent Authority-II. 
2.10	 Aggrieved, the appellants preferred Writ Petition being Special 
Civil Application No.533/2009 before the Gujarat High Court, 
seeking relief in the nature of directions to the respondent to 
issue the necessary NOCs for subsequent sale of the said 
sub-plots. Thereafter another Writ Petition being Special Civil 
Application No.10844/2010 was preferred by the appellants 
before the Gujarat High Court, seeking relief in the nature 
of a declaration to the effect that no ‘Non-Agricultural Use 
Permission’ was required for the usage of the said allotted 
sub-plots. Both the said Writ Petitions were dismissed vide 
separate orders dated 08.02.2010 by the Gujarat High Court.
2.11	 Aggrieved by the dismissal of the said Writ Petitions, the 
appellants preferred Letters Patent Appeals bearing LPA 
Nos.2024/2010 and 1171/2011 before the Gujarat High 
Court. The said Letters Patent Appeals were dismissed vide 
impugned common order dated 23.07.2014. The Gujarat 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
339
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
High Court, while dismissing the said Letter Patent Appeals, 
observed that the appellants herein are ‘illegal occupants’ of 
the said sub-plots and had the knowledge and notice of the 
proceedings under the ULC Act as it is apparent from the 
perusal of the sale deeds and ‘Raja Chitthi’ that said transfers 
were made subject to the proceedings and provisions of the 
ULC Act. It was further observed by the High Court that the 
order of permission granted was in favour of the Society and 
not in favour of the appellants. It was observed that the fact 
that electricity connections and subsequent bills raised were 
in the name of the appellants but the same do not establish 
their possession as emphasised under Section 10(5) of the 
ULC Act. Lastly, the High Court also observed that none of 
the appellants were in possession of the said pieces of land 
on the date on which the ULC Act came into force.
2.12	 Aggrieved by the impugned common order dated 23.07.2014 
passed in LPA No.2024/2010 in Special Civil Application 
No.533/2009 and LPA No.1171/2011 in Special Civil Application 
No.10844/2010, the appellants have preferred the present 
Civil Appeal. The appellants submitted that they have only 
challenged one order and hence the declaration of ‘excess 
vacant land’ is the only hurdle preventing the issuance of 
NOC’s. Therefore, if they were to succeed in the present appeal, 
the other reliefs sought for, and grievances of the appellants, 
including the relief sought for in LPA No.1171/2011, can be 
redressed by the respondents themselves. 
Submissions:
3.	
We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties and perused 
the materials on record. 
3.1	 Learned counsel for the appellants submitted as follows:
3.1.1	 As per the wording of Section 10(5) of the ULC Act, 
the intention of the legislation is clear inasmuch as the 
persons who are in possession of the land are required 
to be served with notice and not merely the persons 
who had filled the declaration form under Section 6(1) 
of the ULC Act. Therefore, the High Court misinterpreted 
the provisions of Section 10(5) of the ULC Act. Had the 

340
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
appellants, as possessors of the concerned plots been 
served notice, they would have been in a position to take 
appropriate action against the orders of the Competent 
Authority-II, as well as the original landowners. Neither 
Benches of the High Court disagreed with the fact that 
the physical and actual possession of the sub-plots in 
question were with the appellants. Rather, while the 
learned Single Judge did not consider the question of 
possession, the Division Bench held that possession 
of the sub-plots by the appellants was illegal under the 
provisions of the ULC Act. 
3.1.2	 That the above finding is contrary to law. This is because 
when the Society allotted the sub-plots to its members, 
including the appellants herein, in the year 1983-84, 
there was no declaration regarding ‘excess vacant 
land’. No notice was ever served to the appellants about 
such a declaration, despite them possessing the sub-
plots, putting up construction upon them and running 
small factories/diamond factories/industrial units. The 
appellants had adduced electricity bills in their name to 
prove possession. However, the High Court held that 
the electricity bills do not establish possession. 
3.1.3	 Further, the High Court erred in holding that the appellants 
were in illegal occupants. The original landowners, 
who had executed the sale deeds, did not mention 
the declaration of ‘excess vacant land’. Moreover, the 
Competent Authority-II only took ‘paper possession’ of 
the sub-plots, and did not take over actual, physical 
and legal possession, which has always remained with 
the appellants. No notice was served on the appellants 
and therefore the possession of ‘excess vacant land’ 
was not taken over legally by, for and on behalf of the 
respondents. Therefore, the High Court should have 
declared the proceedings ‘abated’ under Section 4 of the 
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Repeal Act, 1999 
(for the sake of convenience, “Repealing Act”), which 
speaks of abatement of legal proceedings and granted 
relief to the appellants herein. 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
341
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
4.	
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents submitted as follows: 
4.1	 At the outset, while arguing before the learned Single Judge 
of the Gujarat High Court, the appellants conceded all claims, 
except the prayer to direct the Competent Authority-II to issue 
necessary NOCs for the purpose of getting the registered 
sale deed that was withheld by the Joint Sub-Registrar, Surat. 
Therefore, the High Court was constrained to not consider 
the challenge to the order dated 16.06.1989 on merits. The 
High Court thus never had to consider the applicability of the 
Repealing Act, the challenge to the order dated 16.06.1989, 
or the claims regarding the appellants’ right to receive notice 
under Section 10(5). The concessions made by the appellants 
cannot now be raised before this Court. 
4.1.1	 The appellants have no locus to challenge any order 
passed since the alleged sales were made without 
obtaining permission from the Competent Authority-II 
and were in violation of Sections 5(3) and 27 of the ULC 
Act. The concerned lands were recorded in the name 
of the State Government by an entry dated 22.10.1993, 
well before the repeal of the ULC Act. The appellants 
have challenged the order dated 16.06.1989 after almost 
twenty-one years. 
4.1.2	 The possession claimed by the appellants traces back 
to possession receipts issued by the Society, in whose 
favour the land was transferred by auction dated 
28.04.1981. However, this auction was cancelled by order 
dated 12.10.1984, following which the registration in the 
name of the Society was cancelled, and possession of the 
land was restored to the original landowner. The fact that 
the landowner challenged the order dated 16.06.1989 
by an appeal under Section 33 of the ULC Act, shows 
that possession was with the landowner. 
4.1.3	 It was further submitted that Section 4 of the Repealing 
Act does not apply in the present case, since the 
appellants had no pending proceedings under the ULC 
Act before the commencement of the Repealing Act. On 
24.09.1992, a final order was passed under Section 11 of 
the ULC Act regarding compensation for ‘excess vacant 

342
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
land’. This marked the conclusion of proceedings under 
the ULC Act.
4.1.4	 The claim of the appellants depends solely upon the 
alleged non-issuance of mandatory notice under Section 
10(5) of the ULC Act. However, the legislature did not 
intend that illegal possessors be provided the requisite 
notice under Section 10(5). In this regard, the judgement 
of this Court in C. Albert Morris vs. K. Chandrasekaran, 
(2006) 1 SCC 228 was referred to. 
4.1.5	 Possession was restored to the landowner upon 
cancellation of the auction. Therefore, the subsequent 
sale deed executed in favour of the appellants was in 
violation of Section 5(3) of the ULC Act. If a right is borne 
out of an act that does not have legal sanction, such a 
right may exist, but is not enforceable. Therefore, the 
appellants cannot contend that they had an enforceable 
right to receive notice under Section 10(5) of the ULC Act.
Points for consideration:
5.	
The following points would arise for our consideration:
(i)	
Whether the High Court was justified in dismissing the Writ 
Petitions by not applying Section 4 of the Repealing Act and 
thereby not granting relief to the appellants herein. 
(ii)	
What Order?
6.	
Section 10 of the ULC Act reads as under:
“10.Acquisition of vacant land in excess of ceiling 
limit. – 
(1) As soon as may be after the service of the statement 
under section 9 on the person concerned, the competent 
authority shall cause a notification giving the particulars 
of the vacant land held by such person in excess of the 
ceiling limit and stating that- 
(i)	
such vacant land is to be acquired by the 
concerned State Government; and 
(ii)	
the claims of all person interested in such vacant 
land may be made by them personally or by 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
343
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
their agents giving particulars of the nature of 
their interests in such land, 
to be published for the information of the general public 
in the Official Gazette of the State concerned and in such 
other manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) After considering the claims of the persons interested 
in the vacant land, made to the competent authority in 
pursuance of the notification published under sub-section 
(1), the competent authority shall determine the nature and 
extent of such claims and pass such orders as it deems fit. 
(3) At any time after the publication of the notification 
under sub-section (1), the competent authority may, by 
notification published in the Official Gazette of the State 
concerned, declare that the excess vacant land referred 
to, in the notification published under sub -section (1) 
shall, with effect from such date as may be specified in the 
declaration, be deemed to have been acquired by the State 
Government and upon the publication of such declaration, 
such land shall be deemed to have vested absolutely in 
the State Government free from all encumbrances with 
effect from the date so specified. 
(4) During the period commencing on the date of publication 
of the notification under sub-section (1) and ending with 
the date specified in the declaration made under sub-
section (3) – 
(i)	
no person shall transfer by way of sale, 
mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise any excess 
vacant land (including any part thereof) specified 
in the notification aforesaid and any such transfer 
made in contravention of this provision shall be 
deemed to be null and void; and 
(ii)	
no person shall alter or cause to be altered the 
use of such excess vacant land. 
(5) Where any vacant land is vested in the State 
Government under sub-section (3), the competent authority 
may, by notice in writing, order any person who may be in 

344
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
possession of it to surrender or deliver possession thereof 
to the State Government or to any person duly authorised 
by the State Government in this behalf within thirty days 
of the service of the notice. 
(6) If any person refuses or fails to comply with an order 
made under sub-section (5), the competent authority may 
take possession of the vacant land or cause it to be given 
to the concerned State Government or to any person duly 
authorised by such State Government in this behalf and 
may for that purpose use such force as may be necessary.
Explanation.- In this section, in sub-section (1) of section 
11 and in sections 14 and 23, “State Government”, in 
relation to-
(a) any vacant land owned by the Central Government, 
means the Central Government;
(b) any vacant land owned by any State Government and 
situated in a Union Territory or within the local limits of 
a cantonment declared as such under section 3 of the 
Cantonments Act, 1924, means that State Government.”
7.	
Section 10 of the ULC Act speaks of acquisition of vacant land in 
excess of the ceiling limit. Once a final statement is issued under 
Section 9 of the ULC Act, the same has to be served on the person 
concerned by the Competent Authority which shall also issue a 
notification giving the particulars of the vacant land held by such 
person in excess of the ceiling limit. The said notification shall also 
state that:
(i)	
such vacant land is to be acquired by the concerned State 
Government;
(ii)	
the claims of all persons interested in such vacant land may be 
made by them personally or by their agents giving particulars 
of the nature of their interests in such land. 
8.	
The said notification has to be published in the Official Gazette of the 
State concerned. The Competent Authority shall thereafter consider 
the claims of the persons interested and determine the nature and 
extent of such claims and pass orders accordingly. From the date of 
the publication of the notification in the Official Gazette of the State 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
345
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
as per sub-Section (1) of Section 10 of the ULC Act, the vacant 
land is deemed to have been acquired by the State Government. 
Also, the publication of such a notification implies a declaration that 
such land shall be deemed to have vested absolutely in the State 
Government free from all encumbrances with effect from the date so 
specified. No person can transfer any excess vacant land specified 
in the notification in any manner known to law and no person shall 
alter or cause to be altered the use of such excess vacant land once 
the publication of the notification under sub-Section (1) is made till 
the dates specified in the declaration made under sub-Section (3) 
of Section 10 of the ULC Act. 
9.	
On the basis of the vacant land having vested in the State Government 
as per sub-Section (3) of Section 10 of the ULC Act, the Competent 
Authority, by notice in writing, order any person who may be in 
possession of vacant land of it to surrender or deliver possession 
to the State Government or to any person duly authorised by the 
State Government within thirty days of the service of the notice (vide 
Section 10(5) of the ULC Act). In case, if any person refuses or fails to 
comply with an order made under sub-section (5) of Section 10 of the 
ULC Act, the Competent Authority may take possession of the vacant 
land or cause it to be given to the concerned State Government or 
to any person duly authorised by such State Government and may 
for that purpose use such force as may be necessary.
10.	 Therefore, Section 10 of the ULC Act categorically distinguishes 
between the vesting of land in the State Government and taking 
possession of the vested land from any person who is in possession 
of the said land. The two legal consequences are distinct and have 
to be borne in mind while considering the savings clause as well 
as the abatement clause under Sections 3 and 4, respectively of 
the Repealing Act. 
11.	 The Explanation to Section 10 does not require any discussion for 
the purpose of this case. 
12.	 In the State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Hari Ram, (2013) 4 SCC 280 (“Hari 
Ram”), a two-judge bench of this Court explained the enactment of 
the ULC Act, as well as the Repealing Act, in great detail including 
the history of the ULC Act. Then, this Court referred to the Statement 
of Objects and Reasons of the Repealing Act, outlining as follows: 

346
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“12. Before examining the scope of sub-section (3) of 
Section 10 as well as sub-sections (5) and (6) of Section 
10, reference may be made to the Repeal Act, 1999 and 
its object and reasons which are as follows:
Statement of Object and Reasons:
“1. The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 
was passed when Proclamation of Emergency was in 
operation with a laudable social objective in mind…….
Unfortunately public opinion is nearly unanimous that the 
Act has failed to achieve what was expected of it. It has 
on the contrary pushed up land prices to unconscionable 
levels, practically brought the housing industry to a stop 
and provided copious opportunities for corruption. There 
is widespread clamour for removing this most potent clog 
on housing.
xxx
4. The proposed repeal, along with some other incentives 
and simplification of administrative procedures is expected 
to revive the stagnant housing industry and provide 
affordable living accommodation for those who are in 
a state of underserved want and are entitled to public 
assistance. The repeal will not however, affect land on 
which building activity has already commenced. For that 
limited purpose, exemptions granted under Section 20 of 
the Act will continue to be operative. Amounts paid out by 
the State Government will become refundable.”
13.	 While the Repealing Act thus sought to put an end to the substantive 
operation of the ULC Act, it contained a savings clause, which is 
as follows: 
“3. Savings.—(1) The repeal of the principal Act shall 
not affect—
(a) the vesting of any vacant land under sub-section (3) of 
Section 10, possession of which has been taken over by 
the State Government or any person duly authorised by 
the State Government in this behalf or by the competent 
authority;

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
347
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
(b) the validity of any order granting exemption under sub-
section (1) of Section 20 or any action taken thereunder, 
notwithstanding any judgment of any court to the contrary;
(c) any payment made to the State Government as a 
condition for granting exemption under sub-section (1) of 
Section 20.
(2) Where—
(a) any land is deemed to have vested in the State 
Government under sub-section (3) of Section 10 of 
the principal Act but possession of which has not been 
taken over by the State Government or any person duly 
authorised by the State Government in this behalf or by 
the competent authority; and
(b) any amount has been paid by the State Government 
with respect to such land,
then, such land shall not restored unless the amount paid, 
if any, has been refunded to the State Government.”
14.	 On the other hand, Section 4 of the Repealing Act provides 
for abatement of proceedings pending immediately before the 
commencement of the Act, and for immediate reference, is reproduced 
once as under: 
“4. Abatement of legal proceedings.—All proceedings 
relating to any order made or purported to be made 
under the principal Act pending immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, before any court, tribunal or 
other authority shall abate:
Provided that this section shall not apply to the proceedings 
relating to Sections 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the principal Act 
in so far as such proceedings are relatable to the land, 
possession of which has been taken over by the State 
Government or any person duly authorised by the State 
Government in this behalf or by the competent authority.”
15.	 The core of the dispute at hand centers around the proper application 
of Section 4 of the Repealing Act to the facts of this case. The 
appellants contended that without notice being delivered to them 

348
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
under Section 10(5) of the ULC Act (since they were in actual 
possession of the concerned land), possession has not been legally 
transferred to the State. Therefore, the proceedings relating to 
transfer of possession of the sub-units was ‘pending’ at the time of 
commencement of the Repealing Act, resulting in their abatement 
under Section 4 of the Repealing Act. 
15.1	 Per contra, the respondents submitted that a ‘final order’ 
regarding compensation for the land deemed to be “excess” 
and “vacant” was passed on 24.09.1992. With this order, the 
proceedings concluded and hence there is no question of the 
matter of possession having been ‘abated’ with the advent of 
the Repealing Act. 
16.	 The legal questions that arise for our consideration in the present 
appeal are therefore as follows: 
i)	
Was the delivery of notice under Section 10(5) to the appellants 
(as possessors of the concerned lands) a mandatory step, 
the non-fulfilment of which would render abatement of the 
proceedings in terms of Section 4 of the Repealing Act? 
ii)	
Despite the recording of lands in the name of the State 
Government, if actual possession was not subsequently 
transferred to the Government, would this render the 
proceedings to abate under Section 4 of the Repealing Act?
The aforesaid questions shall be considered together. 
17.	 In Hari Ram, this Court considered the proper meaning of the 
phrases “deemed to have been acquired by the State Government” 
and “vested absolutely in the State Government” in Section 10(3) 
of the ULC Act. The relevant paragraphs containing this Court’s 
reasoning are reproduced below: 
“24. The expression “deemed to have been acquired” 
used as a deeming fiction under sub-section (3) of Section 
10 can only mean acquisition of title or acquisition of 
interests because till that time the land may be either in 
the ownership of the person who held that vacant land 
or to possess such land as owner or as a tenant or as 
mortgagee and so on as defined under Section 2(1) of the 
Act. The word “vested” has not been defined in the Act, 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
349
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
so also the word “absolutely”. What is vested absolutely 
is only the land which is deemed to have acquired and 
nothing more….
xxx
29. What is deemed “vesting absolutely” is that “what is 
deemed to have acquired”. In our view, there must be 
express words of utmost clarity to persuade a court to 
hold that the legislature intended to divest possession 
also, since the owners or holders of the vacant land are 
pitted against a statutory hypothesis….
30. Vacant land, it may be noted, is not actually acquired 
but deemed to have been acquired, in that deeming 
things to be what they are not. Acquisition, therefore, 
does not take possession unless there is an indication 
to the contrary. It is trite law that in construing a deeming 
provision, it is necessary to bear in mind the legislative 
purpose. The purpose of the Act is to impose ceiling on 
vacant land, for the acquisition of land in excess of the 
ceiling limit thereby to regulate construction on such lands, 
to prevent concentration of urban lands in the hands of a 
few persons, so as to bring about equitable distribution. 
For achieving that object, various procedures have to 
be followed for acquisition and vesting. When we look 
at those words in the above setting and the provisions 
to follow such as sub-sections (5) and (6) of Section 10, 
the words “acquired” and “vested” have different meaning 
and content. Under Section 10(3), what is vested is de 
jure possession not de facto, for more reasons than one 
because we are testing the expression on a statutory 
hypothesis and such an hypothesis can be carried only 
to the extent necessary to achieve the legislative intent.”
(underlining by us)
17.1	 Therefore, the land ‘vesting’ with the State Government does 
not connote the transfer of possession. Rather, what is ‘deemed’ 
to have ‘vested’ are the aspects that have deemed i.e., by 
a legal fiction to have been ‘acquired’, i.e., title or interests. 
Possession, as explained in Hari Ram vests de jure and not 
de facto. ‘Acquisition’ (of title or interests) does not necessarily 

350
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
involve the transfer of such de facto possession. Such transfer 
requires certain explicit steps to be taken, which were also 
outlined by this Court in Hari Ram as follows:
“Voluntary Surrender
31. The “vesting” in sub-section (3) of Section 10, 
in our view, means vesting of title absolutely and 
not possession though nothing stands in the way 
of a person voluntarily surrendering or delivering 
possession…
32. We are of the view that so far as the present 
case is concerned, the word “vesting” takes in every 
interest in the property including de jure possession 
and, not de facto but it is always open to a person to 
voluntarily surrender and deliver possession, under 
Section 10(3) of the Act.
33. Before we examine sub-section (5) and sub-
section (6) of Section 10, let us examine the meaning 
of sub-section (4) of Section 10 of the Act, which says 
that during the period commencing on the date of 
publication under sub-section (1), ending with the day 
specified in the declaration made under sub-section 
(3), no person shall transfer by way of sale, mortgage, 
gift or otherwise, any excess vacant land, specified 
in the notification and any such transfer made in 
contravention of the Act shall be deemed to be null 
and void. Further, it also says that no person shall 
alter or cause to be altered the use of such excess 
vacant land. Therefore, from the date of publication 
of the notification under sub-section (1) and ending 
with the date specified in the declaration made in 
sub-section (3), there is no question of disturbing the 
possession of a person, the possession, therefore, 
continues to be with the holder of the land.
Peaceful dispossession
34. Sub-section (5) of Section 10, for the first time, 
speaks of “possession” which says that where any 
land is vested in the State Government under sub-

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
351
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
section (3) of Section 10, the competent authority 
may, by notice in writing, order any person, who 
may be in possession of it to surrender or transfer 
possession to the State Government or to any other 
person, duly authorised by the State Government.
35. If de facto possession has already passed 
on to the State Government by the two deeming 
provisions under sub-section (3) of Section 10, there 
is no necessity of using the expression “where any 
land is vested” under sub-section (5) of Section 10. 
Surrendering or transfer of possession under sub-
section (3) of Section 10 can be voluntary so that the 
person may get the compensation as provided under 
Section 11 of the Act early. Once there is no voluntary 
surrender or delivery of possession, necessarily the 
State Government has to issue notice in writing under 
sub-section (5) of Section 10 to surrender or deliver 
possession……
Forceful possession
36. The Act provides for forceful dispossession but 
only when a person refuses or fails to comply with an 
order under sub-section (5) of Section 10. Sub-section 
(6) of Section 10 again speaks of “possession” which 
says, if any person refuses or fails to comply with 
the order made under sub-section (5), the competent 
authority may take possession of the vacant land 
to be given to the State Government and for that 
purpose, force—as may be necessary—can be 
used…. Forcible dispossession of the land, therefore, 
is being resorted to only in a situation which falls 
under sub-section (6) and not under sub-section (5) 
of Section 10. Sub-sections (5) and (6), therefore, 
take care of both the situations i.e. taking possession 
by giving notice, that is, “peaceful dispossession” and 
on failure to surrender or give delivery of possession 
under Section 10(5), then “forceful dispossession” 
under sub-section (6) of Section 10.”
(underlining by us)

352
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
17.2	 Hence, after de jure possession is vested, there are three 
methods by which de facto possession may be transferred: the 
first is voluntary transfer by the possessor under Section 10(3) 
of the ULC Act. If possession is not voluntarily transferred, then 
the second method is through delivery of notice under Section 
10(5) of the ULC Act to the possessor. In case possession 
is still not transferred, then the third method involves the 
Competent Authority taking possession under Section 10(6) 
of the ULC Act (by force, if required) and delivering it to the 
State Government. 
18.	 On the question of delivery of notice under Section 10(5), this Court 
observed in Hari Ram as under: 
“37. The requirement of giving notice under sub-sections 
(5) and (6) of Section 10 is mandatory. Though the word 
“may” has been used therein, the word “may” in both the 
sub-sections has to be understood as “shall” because a 
court charged with the task of enforcing the statute needs 
to decide the consequences that the legislature intended 
to follow from failure to implement the requirement. Effect 
of non-issue of notice under sub-section (5) or sub-section 
(6) of Section 11 is that it might result in the landholder 
being dispossessed without notice, therefore, the word 
“may” has to be read as “shall”.
xxx
39. The abovementioned directives make it clear that 
sub-section (3) takes in only de jure possession and not 
de facto possession, therefore, if the landowner is not 
surrendering possession voluntarily under sub-section (3) 
of Section 10, or surrendering or delivering possession 
after notice, under Section 10(5) or dispossession by use 
of force, it cannot be said that the State Government has 
taken possession of the vacant land.”
(underlining by us)
18.1	 We, therefore, see that the requirement of issuance of notice 
under Section 10(5) is mandatory and must be issued to the 
person(s) actually in possession of the concerned land. This 
is clear from the wording of the statute (“order any person 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
353
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
who may be in possession of it”), which are interpreted by this 
Court in Hari Ram. This Court opined that the importance of 
delivering notice lay in avoiding a situation where a person 
is “dispossessed” without notice which would be in violation 
of the principles of natural justice, thereby clearly envisioning 
that the possessor must be served with notice. 
18.2	 Having held thus, this Court concluded by establishing the 
proper scope of application of Section 4 of the Repealing 
Act, as under: 
“Effect of the Repeal Act
41. Let us now examine the effect of Section 3 of 
Repeal Act 15 of 1999 on sub-section (3) of Section 
10 of the Act. The Repeal Act, 1999 has expressly 
repealed Act 33 of 1976. The objects and reasons 
of the Repeal Act have already been referred to in 
the earlier part of this judgment. The Repeal Act has, 
however, retained a saving clause. The question 
whether a right has been acquired or liability incurred 
under a statute before it is repealed will in each case 
depend on the construction of the statute and the 
facts of the particular case.
42. The mere vesting of the land under sub-section 
(3) of Section 10 would not confer any right on the 
State Government to have de facto possession of 
the vacant land unless there has been a voluntary 
surrender of vacant land before 18-3-1999. The State 
has to establish that there has been a voluntary 
surrender of vacant land or surrender and delivery of 
peaceful possession under sub-section (5) of Section 
10 or forceful dispossession under sub-section (6) 
of Section 10. On failure to establish any of those 
situations, the landowner or holder can claim the 
benefit of Section 4 of the Repeal Act. The State 
Government in this appeal could not establish any 
of those situations and hence the High Court is right 
in holding that the respondent is entitled to get the 
benefit of Section 4 of the Repeal Act.”
(underlining by us)

354
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
18.3	 Therefore, landowner/holder of land may claim the benefit of 
Section 4 of the Repealing Act (abatement of proceedings) if 
de facto possession has not yet been transferred either through 
voluntary surrender, peaceful transfer under Section 10(5) 
(which, as observed earlier, requires notice to the possessor) 
or forceful dispossession under Section 10(6) of the ULC Act. 
19.	 It would also be apt to refer to a more recent judgment of this Court 
in AP Electrical Equipment Corporation vs. Tahsildar, 2025 SCC 
OnLine SC 447 (“AP Electrical”), in which a Bench comprising J.B. 
Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ. (one of us) ruled on the acquisition 
of ‘possession’ under the ULC Act. Writing for the bench, Pardiwala, 
J. observed: 
“20. Thus, by virtue of the provisions of Section 3 of the 
Repeal Act, 1999, if possession of vacant land has been 
taken over on behalf of the State Government before the 
coming into force of the Repeal Act, 1999, the repeal 
of the Principal Act would not affect the vesting of such 
land under sub-section (3) of Section 10 of Act, 1976. 
Hence, the issue as to whether actual possession of land 
declared excess under the Act has been taken over or 
not assumes great significance after the coming into force 
of the Repeal Act, 1999 inasmuch as if possession has 
not been taken over, the proceedings would abate under 
Section 4 of the Repeal Act, 1999 and the ownership of 
the land, if vested in the State Government under Section 
10(3) of the Act, 1976 would be required to be restored 
to the original land-holder subject to repayment of any 
amount that has been paid by the State Government 
with respect to such land.”
(underlining by us)
19.1	 On the specific question of delivery of notice under Section 
10(5) of the ULC Act, it was held as follows: 
“22. On a plain reading of the aforesaid provisions, 
it is apparent that the statute contemplates giving 
an opportunity to the landholder or any person in 
possession of excess vacant land to surrender or 
deliver possession thereof to the State Government 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
355
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
and for this purpose provides for giving notice in 
writing, ordering such person to surrender or deliver 
possession of such land. It is only when pursuant to 
such notice, such person refuses or fails to comply 
with an order under sub-section (5) within a period of 
thirty days of the service of notice, that the competent 
authority is required to take over possession of the 
vacant land and for that purpose may use force, if 
necessary. Therefore, the provisions of sub-section 
(6) are to be resorted to only when there is refusal 
or non-compliance of an order under sub-section (5) 
of Section 10 of the Act, 1976 within the prescribed 
period.
xxx
25. ….when sub-section (5) of Section 10 mandates 
giving notice of an order under the said sub-section to 
the person in possession, the same is required to be 
complied with in its true letter and spirit. Considering 
the nature of rights involved, mere issuance of notice 
without service thereof, cannot be said to be due 
compliance with the provisions of the statute. Besides, 
the provisions of subsection (6) of Section 10 can be 
resorted to only if the person fails to comply with an 
order under sub-section (5) thereof, within a period 
of thirty days of service of notice. Hence, possession 
cannot be taken over under Section 10(6) of the Act, 
1976 unless a period of thirty days from the date of 
service of notice has elapsed. In absence of service 
of notice under sub-section (5) of Section 10, there 
will be no starting point for calculating the period of 
thirty days. In other words, time will not start running, 
hence the question of taking over possession under 
sub-section (6) of Section 10 of the Act, 1976 will 
not arise at all….
(underlining by us)
19.2	 The delivery of notice to the person in possession was therefore 
unequivocally held to be mandatory. Indeed, the emphasis 

356
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
was on the service of notice on the possessor, as opposed 
to mere issuance of the same. In the absence of such service 
of notice, any attempt at forced dispossession was held to be 
contrary to the statute and hence illegal. 
19.3	 This Court reiterated the conclusion in Hari Ram, i.e., that if 
possession has not been taken over by the State Government, 
then the proceedings under the Act would abate under Section 
4 of the Repealing Act. The “mere vesting of the vacant land 
with the State Government by operation of law, without actual 
possession, is not sufficient”. This Court in AP Electrical 
phrased the conclusion of Hari Ram in the following manner: 
“29. ….To put it in other words, the mere paper 
possession would not save the situation for the State 
Government unless the State is able to establish by 
cogent evidence that actual physical possession of 
the entire land was taken over by evicting each and 
every person from the land. The onus is on the State 
to establish that actual physical possession of the 
excess vacant land was taken over before the repeal.”
(underlining by us)
19.4	 A situation in which possession was not actually transferred 
to the State Government under the provisions of Section 10 
of the ULC Act, was thus deemed to be ‘paper possession’, 
and incapable of preventing proceedings from abating under 
Section 4 of the Repealing Act.
19.5	 This Court in AP Electrical examined a prior decision of this 
Court in State of Assam vs. Bhaskar Jyoti Sarma, (2015) 
5 SCC 321 (“Bhaskar Jyoti Sarma”), since it appeared to 
“at the first blush create an impression that the dictum as 
laid in Hari Ram has been diluted”. It assessed the effect of 
Bhaskar Jyoti Sarma on the dictum on Hari Ram as follows. 
“33. We quote few relevant paras of the said judgment 
as under:—
xxx
“15. The High Court has held that the 
alleged dispossession was not preceded 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
357
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
by any notice under Section 10(5) of the 
Act. Assuming that to be the case all that 
it would mean is that on 7th December, 
1991 when the erstwhile owner was 
dispossessed from the land in question, 
he could have made a grievance based on 
Section 10(5) and even sought restoration 
of possession to him no matter he would 
upon such restoration once again be liable 
to be evicted under Sections 10(5) and 
10(6) of the Act upon his failure to deliver 
or surrender such possession. In reality 
therefore unless there was something 
that was inherently wrong so as to affect 
the very process of taking over such as 
the identity of the land or the boundaries 
thereof or any other circumstance of a 
similar nature going to the root of the matter 
hence requiring an adjudication, a person 
who had lost his land by reason of the 
same being declared surplus under Section 
10(3) would not consider it worthwhile to 
agitate the violation of Section 10(5) for 
he can well understand that even when 
this Court may uphold his contention that 
the procedure ought to be followed as 
prescribed, it may still be not enough for 
him to retain the land for the authorities 
could the very next day dispossess him 
from the same by simply serving a notice 
under Section 10(5). It would, in that view, 
be an academic exercise for any owner 
or person in possession to find fault with 
his dispossession on the ground that no 
notice under Section 10(5) had been 
served upon him.
16. The issue can be viewed from another 
angle also. Assuming that a person in 
possession could make a grievance, no 

358
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
matter without much gain in the ultimate 
analysis, the question is whether such 
grievance could be made long after the 
alleged violation of Section 10(5). If actual 
physical possession was taken over from 
the erstwhile land owner on 7th December, 
1991 as is alleged in the present case any 
grievance based on Section 10(5) ought to 
have been made within a reasonable time 
of such dispossession. If the owner did not 
do so, forcible taking over of possession 
would acquire legitimacy by sheer lapse 
of time. In any such situation the owner 
or the person in possession must be 
deemed to have waived his right under 
Section 10(5) of the Act. Any other view 
would, in our opinion, give a licence to a 
litigant to make a grievance not because 
he has suffered any real prejudice that 
needs to be redressed but only because 
the fortuitous circumstance of a Repeal Act 
tempted him to raise the issue regarding 
his dispossession being in violation of the 
prescribed procedure.
17. Reliance was placed by the respondents 
upon the decision of this Court in Hari 
Ram’s case (supra). That decision does 
not, in our view, lend much assistance 
to the respondents. We say so, because 
this Court was in Hari Ram’s case (supra) 
considering whether the word ‘may’ 
appearing in Section 10(5) gave to the 
competent authority the discretion to issue 
or not to issue a notice before taking 
physical possession of the land in question 
under Section 10(6). The question whether 
breach of Section 10(5) and possible 
dispossession without notice would vitiate 
the act of dispossession itself or render it 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
359
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
non est in the eye of law did not fall for 
consideration in that case. In our opinion, 
what Section 10(5) prescribes is an 
ordinary and logical course of action that 
ought to be followed before the authorities 
decided to use force to dispossess the 
occupant under Section 10(6). In the 
case at hand if the appellant’s version 
regarding dispossession of the erstwhile 
owner in December 1991 is correct, the 
fact that such dispossession was without 
a notice under Section 10(5) will be of 
no consequence and would not vitiate or 
obliterate the act of taking possession for 
the purposes of Section 3 of the Repeal Act. 
That is because Bhabadeb Sarma-erstwhile 
owner had not made any grievance based 
on breach of Section 10(5) at any stage 
during his lifetime implying thereby that he 
had waived his right to do so.”
(Emphasis supplied)
34. We have supplied emphasis on paras 15 and 17 
of Bhaskar Jyoti Sharma (supra) referred to above, for 
the purpose of highlighting that Hari Ram (supra) has 
not been diluted in any manner. We are of the firm 
view that Hari Ram (supra) holds the field even as 
on date. The statements of law in Hari Ram (supra) 
are absolutely correct.
35. If two decisions of this Court appear inconsistent 
with each other, the High Courts are not to follow one 
and overlook the other, but should try to reconcile and 
respect them both and the only way to do so is to 
adopt the wise suggestion of Lord Halsbury given in 
Quinn v. Leathem, [1901] A.C. 495 and reiterated by 
the Privy Council in Punjab Cooperative Bank Ltd. v. 
Commr. of Income Tax, Lahore AIR 1940 PC 230:
“…… every judgment must be read as 
applicable to the particular facts proved or 

360
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
assumed to be proved, since the generality 
of the expressions, which may be found 
there, are not intended to be expositions 
of the whole law, but governed or qualified 
by the particular facts of the case in which 
such expressions are to be found.” and 
follow that decision whose facts appear 
more in accord with those of the case at 
hand.”
20.	 We are inclined to agree with this view of this Court in AP Electrical 
regarding the effect of Bhaskar Jyoti Sarma on the dictum in 
Hari Ram. In the former, de facto possession had actually been 
transferred to the State Government. Albeit, this was done by force 
in contravention of the requirement to mandatorily issue notice under 
Section 10(5) of the ULC Act. In this regard, this Court held that if 
the objection regarding the non-compliance with Section 10(5) is 
not made within a “reasonable time”, then the right to so object is 
“waived”. 
20.1	 However, the facts of Hari Ram (and indeed, the present 
case) are different insofar as de facto possession was not 
transferred, by force or otherwise. Therefore, the question is 
not whether an actual transfer of possession by force is vitiated 
by a delay in raising objections to the transfer. Rather, the 
question is whether actual possession has been transferred 
at all, if no process of transfer has been conducted under the 
various provisions of Section 10 of the ULC Act. Therefore, 
the dictum in Hari Ram stands undisturbed by the judgment 
in Bhaskar Jyoti Sarma. 
20.2	 In fact, this Court in AP Electrical wholly aligned with the 
dictum in Hari Ram regarding the difference between ‘vesting’ 
and ‘possession’, observing as follows: 
“38. If de facto possession has already passed on to 
the State Government by the two deeming provisions 
under sub-section (3) to Section 10, there is no 
necessity of using the expression “where any land 
is vested.” under sub-section (5) to Section 10…
39. The mere vesting of the land under subsection 
(3) of Section 10 would not confer any right on the 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
361
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
State Government to have de facto possession of 
the vacant land unless there has been a voluntary 
surrender of vacant land before 18.03.1999. State 
has to establish that there has been a voluntary 
surrender of vacant land or surrender and delivery of 
peaceful possession under subsection (5) of Section 
10 or forceful dispossession under sub-section (6) 
of Section 10. On failure to establish any of those 
situations, the landowner or holder can claim the 
benefit of Section 3 of the Repeal Act, 1999. In the 
case on hand, the State Government has in our 
considered view not been able to establish any of 
those situations and hence the learned Single Judge 
was right in holding that the appellant herein is entitled 
to get the benefit of Section 3 of the Repeal Act, 1999.”
(underlining by us)
20.3	 Finally, bringing all the above concepts together, this Court 
summed up the proper effect of the Repealing Act, as also 
the question of possession under Section 10 of the ULC Act, 
as follows: 
“40. The effect of Repeal Act, 1999 is further clear. If 
the landowner remains in physical possession, then 
irrespective of his land being declared surplus and/
or entry being made in favour of the State in revenue 
records, he will not be divested of his rights….
41. The propositions of law governing the issue of 
possession in context with Sections 10(5) and 10(6) 
respectively of the Act, 1976 read with Section 3 of 
the Repeal Act, 1999 may be summed up thus:
[1]	
The Repeal Act, 1999 clearly talks about the 
possession being taken under Section 10(5) 
or Section 10(6) of the Act, 1976, as the case 
may be.
[2]	
It is a statutory obligation on the part of the 
competent authority or the State to take 
possession strictly as permitted in law.

362
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
[3]	
In case the possession is purported to have been 
taken under Section 10(6) of the Act, 1976 the 
Court is still obliged to look into whether “taking 
of such possession” is valid or invalidated on 
any of the considerations in law.
[4]	
The possession envisaged under Section 3 of 
the Repeal Act, 1999 is de facto and not de 
jure only.
[5]	
The mere vesting of “land declared surplus” 
under the Act without resuming “de facto 
possession” is of no consequence and the land 
holder is entitled to the benefit of the Repeal 
Act, 1999.
[6]	
The requirement of giving notice under sub-
sections (5) and (6) of Section 10 respectively 
is mandatory. Although the word “may” has 
been used therein, yet the word “may” in both 
the sub-sections should be understood as 
“shall” because a Court is obliged to decide 
the consequences that the legislature intended 
to follow from the failure to implement the 
requirement.
[7]	
The mere vesting of the land under sub-section 
(3) of Section 10 would not confer any right 
on the State Government to have de facto 
possession of the vacant land unless there 
has been a voluntary surrender of vacant land 
before 18th March 1999.
[8]	
The State has to establish by cogent evidence on 
record that there has been a voluntary surrender 
of vacant land or surrender and delivery of 
peaceful possession under sub-section (6) of 
Section 10 or forceful dispossession under sub-
section (6) of Section 10.”
(underlining by us)

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
363
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
20.4	 We find that this view is in accordance with the prior dictum 
of this Court in Hari Ram, and agree with the same. At this 
juncture, we find it appropriate to briefly go through certain 
other pronouncements of this Court, all of which are aligned 
on the necessity of serving notice on the possessor under 
Section 10(5); the difference between vesting and possession; 
the difference between de jure and de facto possession and 
the effect of the Repealing Act. 
21.	 The following judgments of this Court could be adverted to at this stage: 
a)	
In Mangalsen vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2014) 15 SCC 
332, this Court observed that the application filed under Section 
20 of the ULC Act was still pending and therefore, the State 
Government’s claim to taking possession of the surplus land was 
found not based on facts. It was also not clear from the record 
whether or not the notice under Section 10(5) was served upon 
the appellant therein. The notice under Section 11(8) of the ULC 
Act determining compensation was after a gap of ten years. 
Hence, it was observed that there was no evidence to prove 
that the notice issued under Section 10(5) had been served 
upon the appellant therein or that he had illegally occupied the 
surplus land after 30.01.1990. In paragraph 14 of the judgment, 
this Court has also noted the tardy approach in the matter by 
the competent authority which makes an interesting reading. 
b)	
In Gajanan Kamlya Patil vs. Additional Collector & 
Competent Authority, (2014) 12 SCC 523, it was held that 
in the absence of any evidence to show that appellant therein 
had voluntarily surrendered or respondents therein had taken 
peaceful or forceable possession of the lands in question, the 
respondents therein had only de jure possession before coming 
into force of the Repealing Act. Since de facto possession of 
lands was not taken before execution of possession receipt, it 
was held that the respondent therein could not hold on to the 
lands in question which were legally owned and possessed by 
the appellants therein. Accordingly, it was observed as under:
“12. We have, therefore, clearly indicated that it 
was always open to the authorities to take forcible 
possession and, in fact, in the notice issued under 
Section 10(5) of the ULC Act, it was stated that if the 

364
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
possession had not been surrendered, possession 
would be taken by application of necessary force. For 
taking forcible possession, certain procedures had to 
be followed. The respondents have no case that such 
procedures were followed and forcible possession 
was taken. Further, there is nothing to show that the 
respondents had taken peaceful possession, nor is 
there anything to show that the appellants had given 
voluntary possession. The facts would clearly indicate 
that only de jure possession had been taken by the 
respondents and not de facto possession before 
coming into force of the repeal of the Act. Since there 
is nothing to show that de facto possession had been 
taken from the appellants prior to the execution of 
the possession receipt in favour of Mmrda, it cannot 
hold on to the lands in question, which are legally 
owned and possessed by the appellants….”
(underlining by us)
c)	
In U.A. Basheer vs. State of Karnataka, (2021) 5 SCC 313, 
while referring to Sections 3 and 4 of the Repealing Act which 
deal with savings clause and abatement of proceeding clause 
respectively observed as under:
“18. It is clear from the aforementioned legislative 
provisions that the question of current possession 
of the suit property is absolutely material to a full 
adjudication of the controversy before us. This is 
because, if the appellant does enjoy possession, 
as claimed by him, any proceedings for any excess 
land under the principal Act are liable to abate, as 
per Section 3 and Section 4 of the Repeal Act, and 
the appellant would be entitled to ownership and 
possession over the suit property……”
(underlining by us) 
d)	
In State of Orissa vs. Sakhi Bewa, (2022) 16 SCC 594, it 
was held that the question whether surplus land was taken 
over by the State is a question of fact and is not concerned 
with payment of compensation to the landowner. That merely 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
365
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
because compensation has not been paid, it cannot be presumed 
that possession was not taken over. In the aforesaid context, 
it was observed as under:
“4.3. A fair reading of Sections 3 and 4 of the 1999 
Repeal Act makes it clear that all proceedings relating 
to any order made or purported to be made under 
the principal Act (the 1976 Act) pending immediately 
before the commencement of the 1999 Repeal Act, 
before any court, tribunal or other authority shall 
abate. Section 4 of the Repeal Act shall not apply 
provided possession of land has been taken over by 
the State Government or any person duly authorised 
by the State Government in this behalf or by the 
competent authority. Therefore, if the possession of 
the surplus land/land has been taken over by the State 
Government or any person duly authorised by the 
State Government in this behalf or by the competent 
authority, in that case, the proceedings relating to 
any order made under the principal 1976 Act shall 
not abate, meaning thereby that the 1999 Repeal Act 
shall not affect all those proceedings with respect 
to the land of which the possession has been taken 
over. Therefore, before declaring the proceedings 
as having abated in view of Sections 3 and 4 of the 
1999 Repeal Act, it has to be considered and decided 
whether possession of the surplus land/land has been 
taken over by the State Government or any person 
duly authorised by the State Government in this behalf 
or by the competent authority or not. If it is found 
and held that the possession of the surplus land has 
been taken over, in that case, the proceedings shall 
not be declared as having been abated.”
(underlining by us)
22.	 The land in question is admeasuring 9303 square metres in Village 
Katargam, Surat, Gujarat which initially belonged to one Nathubhai 
Ranchhodbhai and on his demise to his heir Kuberbhai Nathubhai. 
That on the enforcement of ULC Act proceedings were initiated under 
the said Act on Kuberbhai Nathubhai filing a Form under Section 
6(1) of the ULC Act and by making a declaration thereby. Initially, 

366
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the Competent Authority-I under the ULC Act held that the land in 
question was exempt as per Section 21 of the said Act and the 
remaining land was within the ceiling limit. The Society purchased 
the land bearing Survey No.339 at a public auction on 28.04.1981 
conducted by the Special Recovery Officer and the name of Society 
was entered in the Mutation records. Industrial units were developed 
on the said land. Thereafter, the Assistant Collector passed an 
order cancelling Mutation entries on the premise that the public 
auction dated 28.04.1981 was not conducted in accordance with the 
provisions of the ULC Act which order was challenged before the 
Collector and on being unsuccessful, it was challenged before the 
Assistant Secretary, Revenue Division by filing a revision petition. 
22.1	 When the matters stood thus, the Government of Gujarat 
exercised its revisional powers under Section 34 of the ULC 
Act and set aside the initial order dated 18.02.1980 passed 
by the Competent Authority-II and remanded the matter for 
reconsideration and on 16.01.1989 it was held that 662.18 
square metres was ‘excess land’. None of the appellants 
herein were parties to the proceedings culminating in the order 
dated 16.01.1989. Further, on the cancellation of the auction 
purchase in favour of Khodidas Kanjibhai Patel, the original 
landowner, Kuberbhai Nathubhai, entered into an agreement 
of sale of the sub-plots in favour of the appellants herein, and 
they became owners in possession of the said sub-plot Nos.1 
to 77 situated upon Survey No.339. When such being the 
position, on 22.11.1990, a notice was issued under Section 
10(5) of the ULC Act to the original landholder directing him to 
vacate and handover possession of the “excess land” to the 
respondent/State Government within a period of thirty days. 
The said notice has been extracted below. The said notice 
was not issued to the appellants herein and despite that it 
appears that the Deputy Collector, ULC drew a Panchnama 
dated 21.01.1992, “taking over possession” of the ‘excess 
land’ to the tune of 662.18 square metres out of the total area 
of the land admeasuring 9303 square metres. It is only when 
the appellants herein sought ‘No Objection Certificates’ for 
further sale that they became aware that ‘excess land’ was 
taken over by the State Government and had vested with 
them. Hence, they filed the Writ Petition before the High Court 
which was dismissed.

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
367
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
22.2	 The fact that notice under Section 10(5) of the ULC Act was 
issued to the original owners implies that the respondents 
were aware that the possession of the said land had to be 
taken in accordance with Section 10 of the ULC Act. This was 
without ascertaining the fact that possession of the said land 
was with the appellants herein but no notice was issued to 
the appellants herein who were in actual possession of the 
subject land. 
22.3	 Applying the above settled law to the facts at hand, we find 
the following facts on the face of the record: 
a)	
The appellants herein were in actual possession of the 
sub-plots in question at the time of enforcement of the 
Repealing Act.
b)	
On 22.11.1990, a notice under Section 10(5) regarding 
transfer of possession to the State Government was 
issued to the original landowner but not the appellants 
herein, who were in possession of the concerned sub-
plots. The said notice reads as under: 
“Regd. Post A.D. No.ULC/6(1)2/773/3912/733/
Section – 10(5)  
Competent Authority and  
Additional Collector Office,  
First Floor, Nanpura, Surat
Date : 22-11-90
To,
Smt. Maniben wd/o Kuberbhai Nathubhai  
Resident: Gotalavadi, Katargam,  
Dist. Surat
Pursuant to Section – 9 of the Urban Land Ceiling 
and Regulation Act, Part “CH” of Form – 3 of the 
Final Statement made surplus and notice to the land 
holder under Section – 10(5) regarding entrusting the 
possession of the land forfeited to the government 
vide Notification of Section – 10(3).
It is hereby informed to you that by passing an order 
under Section – 8(4) of the above act regarding 

368
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the land as described in the schedule below, Final 
Statement under Section – 9 was forwarded on 16-
6-89, after that Notification of Section – 10(1) was 
published vide dated 28-9-89. Now Final Notification 
of Section – 10(3) has been published on dated 21-
8-90 in Government Gazette in Part 4-C in English 
and Gujarati on Page No.1316 to 1317. According 
to that notification, a land mentioned in the schedule 
below has been forfeited to the government from 
the date of publication as an additional land free 
from all encumbrances.
So, it is hereby ordered under Section – 10(5) of 
the above Act that person holding the possession / 
usage of the land mentioned in the schedule below to 
entrust the possession of the said land to the officer 
authorized by the state government i.e. Additional 
Collector, Urban Land Ceiling, Surat within days – 
30 (thirty) from the receipt of this notice.
If you may commit any delay or failure in entrusting 
the possession of the land mentioned in the 
schedule, possession shall be taken by using 
required force by taking requisite steps under 
Section 10 – (6) of the above act. So this notice 
is for entrusting the possession of the land within 
time limit of 30 days.
SCHEDULE
Sr. 
No.
Name of 
the Land 
Holder
Name of 
Taluka
S.No.  
Area of the 
Plot land No.
Declared 
surplus 
sq. Mt.
1
2
3
4
5
Maniben 
wd/o 
Kuberbhai 
Nathubhai
Katargam 
Choryasi
339
Paiki T.P. 
No.4
662.18 
No.9/A 
Paiki 9/B
Sd/-  
Competent Authority and  
Additional Collector, Surat

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
369
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
Copy forwarded: -
Surveyor – Shree I.G. Parekh  
2/- For preparing map of the above surplus land 
in triplicate.” 
22.4	 Therefore, as per the provisions of Sections 10(3) and 10(5) of 
the ULC Act, the subject land, despite having ‘vested’ (along 
with acquisition of title or interests) in the State Government, 
was not in the possession of the Government. Further, 
possession was not taken by any of the three possible means, 
i.e., voluntary transfer by the appellants, issuance of notice 
under Section 10(5) to the appellants followed by peaceful 
transfer or forceful acquisition of possession under Section 
10(6) of the ULC Act. The possession of the land continues 
with the appellants herein till date.
22.5	 Such a scenario is clearly one where the provision of abatement 
under Section 4 of the Repealing Act applies. The proviso to 
Section 4 states that the section would not apply to proceedings 
under Sections 11, 12, 13 and 14 of the ULC Act relating to 
land that has already been taken possession of by the State 
Government. Therefore, the proviso has no applicability to the 
facts at hand and the benefit of abatement under the section 
would apply wholesale. 
22.6	 That the approach to be had with cases such as the present 
one is also evident upon a reading of Sections 3 and 4 of the 
Repealing Act. Clearly, the legislative intent is that in cases 
where lands were deemed to have been vested but possession 
was not yet transferred as on date of enforcement of the 
Repealing Act (such as the present case), the lands were to 
remain in possession of the private parties. Section 3(2) of 
the Repealing Act prescribes the procedure to be followed in 
specific types of situations, i.e., where amounts paid by the 
State Government must be refunded. This is not so in the 
present case. However, the underlying concepts are clear – 
that vesting and possession are distinct and that without the 
latter, the private parties have a claim over continuing to be 
in possession. This is subsequently further emphasised in 
Section 4 of the Repealing Act, as explained earlier under 
which proceedings abate as a result. 

370
[2026] 1 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
22.7	 We are therefore unable to agree with the contentions of the 
respondents herein. Also, it is not correct to submit that the 
proceedings under the Act had concluded with the ‘final order’ 
regarding compensation dated 24.10.1992. The matter could 
only have concluded by transfer of possession through one of 
the three possible means explained above. The mere recording 
of the lands in the name of the State Government by entry dated 
22.10.1993 does not demonstrate transfer of possession. Rather, 
the same only denotes de jure possession with the de facto 
possession remaining in the hands of the appellants herein. 
22.8	 Similarly, we are unable to agree with the contention of the 
respondents that the appellants cannot claim a right to receive 
notice under Section 10(5) of the ULC Act. The propriety of the 
sale deed executed in favour of the appellants is immaterial. 
Section 10(5) mandates the delivery of notice to the person(s) 
in possession of the concerned lands. On the date of issuance 
of notice (22.11.1990), the appellants as possessors did not 
receive the same. It was sent to the erstwhile owner of the 
subject land. This also implies that the respondents also were 
aware of the fact that actual possession was not with them 
and there was a need to issue notice under Section 10(5) of 
the ULC Act before taking over actual possession. However, 
the respondents did not ascertain as to in whose name actual 
possession stood. Therefore, no notice was issued to the 
appellants and hence there being no transfer of possession 
in accordance with Section 10 of the ULC Act, it continues 
with the appellants both in fact as well as in law. Hence, they 
are entitled to the benefit of Section 4 of the Repealing Act as 
they do not fall within the scope of Section 3 of the said Act 
which is the savings clause. The omission to issue notice to 
the appellants violated the mandatory requirement of serving 
notice under Section 10(5) and meant that the legal process of 
acquiring possession was still ongoing, leading to abatement 
of proceedings under Section 4 of the Repealing Act on its 
enforcement. 
22.9	 Another argument of learned standing counsel for the 
respondent-State is to the effect that the appellants herein 
had not pressed the main reliefs in Special Civil Application 
No.533/2009 and had only sought prayer in terms of paragraph 

[2026] 1 S.C.R. 
371
Dalsukhbhai Bachubhai Satasia & Others v. State of Gujarat & Others
26(c) i.e., directing the competent authority and Additional 
Collector, ULC, Surat to issue necessary “NOC” for the 
purpose of getting the registered sale deeds released by the 
Joint Sub-Registrar, Surat, and the said prayer was not rightly 
granted as the other prayers were not pressed is also not 
correct. Further, in the writ petition, the learned Single Judge 
of the High Court also observed that the appellants herein 
cannot be granted NOC as they did not have a valid title. We 
find that the said reasoning is contrary to Section 4 of the 
Repealing Act inasmuch as the abatement of proceedings is 
by operation of law based on the facts of each case and once 
the proceedings under Section 10 of the ULC Act abate, the 
consequential reliefs would have to be granted to the appellants 
herein. Hence, the appellants are entitled to all consequential 
reliefs pursuant to the abatement of the proceedings under 
Section 4 of the Repealing Act as the case of the appellants 
squarely falls within the scope of the provision.
The consistent reasoning adopted by this Court in similar 
cases, as detailed above squarely applies to this case also.
23.	 In this case, the Division Bench of the High Court was not right in 
holding that the appellants were not in possession of the subject land 
on the date on which the ULC Act came into force and they were illegal 
occupants. Further, the High Court was also not right in holding that 
although the electricity bills showed the name of the appellants, it did 
not establish their possession under Section 10(5) of the ULC Act.
24.	 Consequently, the impugned orders of the High Court in LPA 
No.2024/2010 in Special Civil Application No.533/2009 dated 
23.07.2014 and in Special Civil Application No.533/2009 dated 
08.02.2010 are set aside. This appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
No costs.
Result of the case: Appeal Allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
