[2026] 5 S.C.R. 584 : 2026 INSC 481
Narayana Health & Ors.
v.
The State of West Bengal & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No(s). 2461-2462 of 2026)
12 May 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Alok Aradhe JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order passed by 
the High Court setting aside the summoning order passed by the 
Magistrate and remanding the matter, regarding complicity of first 
appellant-corporate entity running the co-accused hospital, and the 
third appellant-Chairman, both of whom are in a separate territorial 
jurisdiction than the Magistrate; and whether the allegations 
contained in the complaint prima facie disclose commission of a 
criminal offence.
Headnotes†
West Bengal Clinical Establishment (Registration, Regulation & 
Transparency) Act, 2017 – s.34 – Penal Code, 1860 – ss.405, 
420 and 120B – Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct, 
Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 – Successful medical 
treatment of complainant’s mother and on discharge hospital 
issued a bill – Complainant alleged discrepancies in the bills 
and sought medical records for insurance reimbursement – 
Hospital issued revised bill reflecting adjustment in the 
charges, and communicated to the complainant to collect 
the refund amount – However, complaint case filed alleging 
commission of offences u/ss.405, 420 and 120B, IPC along 
with s.34 of the 2017 Act that the hospital had intentionally 
included charges for a diagnostic test which had not been 
performed, that the relevant medical documents were not 
supplied promptly; and that certain hospital personnel 
behaved improperly and issued threats when the complainant 
questioned the billing and sought clarification regarding the 
treatment records, against first appellant-company running 
the hospital; second appellant-hospital; third appellant-
Chairman of the company; fourth appellant-representative 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
585
Narayana Health & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
attached with the hospital; and third respondent-former 
employee of the hospital – Issuance of process by the 
Magistrate – Appellants sought quashing of the complaint and 
the summoning order u/s.482 CrPC – High Court remand the 
matter to the Magistrate to reconsider complicity of accused 
persons – Correctness:
Held: Allegations made in the complaint, even if assumed to be 
true in their entirety and accepted at face value, fail to disclose 
the commission of any offence under the Sections invoked against 
the accused persons – Complaint also alleged grievance about 
non-supply or delay in supply of medical records – Allegation 
falls short of a criminal offence and could at the most give rise 
to some kind of a claim in civil law or a statutory requirement 
under the 2017 Act or 2002 Regulations – However, the 
complaint only refers to the commission of offence u/s.34, which 
provides for criminal liability for declared offences and prescribes 
punishments – Legislative scheme clearly establishes that disputes 
concerning billing practices, supply of medical records, or service-
related grievances are primarily intended to be addressed as 
deficiencies for which compensation is payable, if found to be 
true – Without even indicating as to how and in which manner 
the criminal offence has been committed, not permissible for the 
complainant to proceed with prosecution by just mentioning s.34 
in the complaint – Complainant may have certain service-related 
grievances and these could be addressed u/s.29 of the 2017 
Act – Thus, no criminal offence even u/s.34 of the 2017 Act made 
out – Fit case for exercising jurisdiction u/s.482 CrPC to quash the 
criminal complaint and the High Court failed to exercise such a 
power – Judgment and order passed by the High Court set aside 
and the complaint case quashed. [Paras 11-20].
Case Law Cited
State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal [1990] Supp. 3 SCR 259 : (1992) 
Supp. 1 SCC 335; Ramesh Chandra Gupta v. State of UP (2022) 
18 SCC 706; Arshad Neyaz Khan v. State of Jharkhand, 2025 
SCC OnLine SC 2058; Sadhupati Nageswara Rao v. State of 
Andhra Pradesh [2012] 6 SCR 1143 : (2012) 8 SCC 547; Prof. 
RK Vijayasarathy v. Sudha Seetharam  [2019] 2 SCR 185 : (2019) 
16 SCC 739; Joseph Salvaraj A. v. State of Gujarat [2011] 8 SCR 

586
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
815 : (2011) 7 SCC 59; Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P. [2003] 1 SCR 
622 : (2003) 3 SCC 11; Alpic Finance Ltd. v. P. Sadasivan [2001] 
1 SCR 1059 : (2001) 3 SCC 513; State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot 
Sandhu [2005] Supp. 2 SCR 79 : (2005) 11 SCC 600 – referred to.
Shashank Garg v. State and Ors., 2025 SCC OnLine Del 
2455 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; West Bengal Clinical Establishments 
(Registration, Regulation and Transparency) Act, 2017; Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973; Indian Medical Council (Professional 
Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002.
List of Keywords
Summoning order; Remanding the matter for reconsideration; 
Corporate entity running the hospital; Chairman; Separate territorial 
jurisdiction; Commission of criminal offence; Medical treatment; 
Discharge from the hospital; Discrepancies in the bills; Medical 
records for insurance reimbursement; Revised bill; Diagnostic 
test; Hospital personnel behaved improperly and issued threats; 
Issuance of process; Quashing of the complaint and the summoning 
order; Complicity of accused persons; Criminal breach of trust; 
Cheating; Criminal conspiracy.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No(s). 
2461-2462 of 2026 
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.05.2023 of the High Court 
at Calcutta in CRR No. 967 of 2021 and CRAN No. 1 of 2021.
Appearances for Parties
Abhinay, Gagan Gupta, Amici Curiae.
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Nidhesh Gupta, Sr. Adv., Shivendra Singh, Bikram Dwivedi, 
Ms. Prakriti Rastogi, Ms. Aryama Singh Rajput.
Adv. for the Respondent(s):
Kunal Mimani.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
587
Narayana Health & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeals arise from the judgement and order of the 
High Court1, setting aside the summoning order passed by the 
Judicial Magistrate2 and remanding the matter for reconsideration, 
especially regarding complicity of first appellant, a corporate entity 
running the co-accused hospital, and the third appellant, being the 
Chairman, both of whom are in a separate territorial jurisdiction 
than the Magistrate. The main issue is whether the allegations 
contained in the complaint prima facie disclose commission of a 
criminal offence or not. 
3.	
The facts relevant for our consideration are as follows. The present 
proceedings arise out of a complaint filed by the second respondent 
(“complainant”) in relation to the medical treatment of his mother, 
Smt. Bina Sen, who was admitted to Narayana Multispecialty 
Hospital, Barasat, Kolkata, on 13.02.2021 for treatment of her 
fractured right femur bone. She underwent a successful surgery 
on 15.02.2021 and remained admitted until her discharge on 
19.02.2021. Upon discharge, the hospital issued a bill for the 
medical services rendered. The complainant paid a sum of Rs. 
1,71,130/- towards the treatment expenses, out of a total billed 
amount of approximately Rs. 1,94,307.84/- after certain discounts 
were applied by the hospital. After the discharge of the patient, the 
complainant approached the hospital authorities on 20.02.2021, 
raising concerns regarding certain discrepancies in the billing and 
seeking copies of medical records and documents relating to the 
treatment of his mother. The complainant was informed about the 
hospital’s grievance redressal mechanism and was advised to follow 
the established procedure for obtaining records and addressing 
billing concerns. Subsequently, the complainant requested copies 
of medical documents and treatment records required for purposes 
of insurance reimbursement.
1	
Vide judgement and order dated 16.05.2023 in C.R.R. No. 967 of 2021 with CRAN No. 1 of 2021. 
2	
Vide order dated 11.03.2021 in Complaint Case No. C-533 of 2021. 

588
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
4.	
Thereafter, on 23.02.2021, the hospital issued a revised bill reflecting 
an adjustment in the charges, particularly in relation to an HRCT 
test amounting to Rs. 2,500/-, which had earlier been included in 
the bill. According to the hospital, though the said diagnostic test 
was proposed, it was in fact not conducted because the subsequent 
condition of the patient did not warrant it. Consequently, the revised 
bill reflected that the amount of Rs. 2,500/- was liable to be refunded 
to the complainant. The hospital communicated the same to the 
complainant through email on 24.02.2021, requesting him to collect 
the refund amount from the hospital counter or to provide bank details 
to facilitate the transfer of the amount. A reminder communication 
was also sent thereafter, requesting the complainant to collect the 
refund.
5.	
The complainant instituted Complaint Case No. C-533 of 2021 before 
the Judicial Magistrate, 2nd Court, Barasat, alleging that the hospital 
had intentionally included charges for a diagnostic test which had 
not been performed, and that relevant medical documents were 
not supplied promptly. The complaint further alleged that certain 
hospital personnel (arrayed in this appeal as the fourth appellant 
and the third respondent) behaved improperly and issued threats 
when the complainant questioned the billing and sought clarification 
regarding the treatment records. On the basis of these allegations, 
offences under Sections 406, 420 and 120B of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (“IPC”), along with Section 34 of the West Bengal 
Clinical Establishments (Registration, Regulation and Transparency) 
Act, 2017 (“2017 Act”), were invoked against the first appellant, the 
company running the hospital; the second appellant, the hospital; 
the third appellant, being the Chairman of the company; the fourth 
appellant, being the representative attached with the hospital; and 
the third respondent, being the former employee of the hospital. 
6.	
The Magistrate examined the complainant and preliminary statements 
of supporting witnesses under Section 200 of the Criminal Procedure 
Code, 1973 (“CrPC”) and, by order dated 11.03.2021, issued process 
against the accused persons. Aggrieved thereby, the appellants filed 
a petition for quashing the complaint and the summoning order under 
Section 482, CrPC.
7.	
The High Court, vide impugned judgement dated 16.05.2023, 
instead of considering the submissions of the appellants that no 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
589
Narayana Health & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
offence is made out and that the allegations, even if true, relate to 
a civil dispute, proceeded to remand the matter to the Magistrate to 
reconsider complicity of accused persons living in separate territorial 
jurisdictions. While setting aside the order of summons, the High Court 
without a proper examination of the facts, particularly in the context 
of the offences alleged, made a passing comment that offence has 
been made out. The relevant portion of the impugned judgement is 
reproduced below - 
“I have considered the allegations made in the petition 
of complaint as also the evidence under Section 200 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure (initial deposition) of the 
complainant Kollol Kumar Sen and his witness Uttam 
Kumar Basu. Both the witnesses apart from the issue 
relating to inflated bill of Rs.2,500/- being charged for a 
test which was not done also specifically alleged in respect 
of accused persons Suvendu Prakash and Anup Bhaduri 
who pushed the complainant into the office and threatened 
him that they are least bothered of such crimes and if the 
same is disclosed he may have to face concern relating 
to safety of his life. 
The aforesaid act of the two accused persons prima facie 
do make out an offence under Section 504 of the Indian 
Penal Code. At this stage, the concern of the Court is to 
see whether the allegations in the complaint do make out 
an offence. 
On an assessment of the whole complaint, I am of the view 
that offence has been made out, however, the complicity 
of all the persons are to be assessed. It is an admitted 
position that the petitioner nos. 1 and 3 are having their 
address at a separate territorial jurisdiction, although 
petitioner no. 1 is an artificial person but petitioner no.3 
is a natural person, his complicity relating to the offence 
is to be assessed on a different yardstick under Section 
200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure prior to issuance 
of process. 
Accordingly, the order dated 11.03.2021 issuing process 
is set aside. Learned Judicial Magistrate, 2nd Court, 
Barasat, North 24 Parganas would assess regarding the 

590
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
complicity of the petitioner no.3 as also petitioner no.1 
before issuing process. 
The revisional application being CRR 967 of 2021 is partly 
allowed.”
8.	
Aggrieved, the appellants have approached this Court and by our order 
dated 28.08.2023, while issuing notice in the Special Leave Petition, 
this Court also stayed further proceedings before the Magistrate.
9.	
We heard Mr. Nidhesh Gupta, Senior Advocate for the appellants, 
and as none appeared on behalf of the complainant, we requested 
Mr. Gagan Gupta, Senior Advocate, to assist us as an amicus curiae. 
10.	 The appellants had approached the High Court against issuance of 
process by the Magistrate by invoking its inherent jurisdiction under 
Section 482 of the CrPC. The circumstances in which the High Court 
can exercise its power and jurisdiction under Section 482 to quash 
criminal proceedings is well articulated in a number of precedents, 
commencing with the celebrated decision of this Court in State of 
Haryana v. Bhajan Lal,3 the relevant excerpt of which is as follows - 
“1. Where the allegations made in the first information 
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their 
face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima 
facie constitute any offence or make out a case against 
the accused.
2. Where the allegations in the first information report 
and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not 
disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation 
by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except 
under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 
155(2) of the Code.
3. Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR 
or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the 
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and 
make out a case against the accused.
3	
(1992) Supp. 1 SCC 335; Ramesh Chandra Gupta v. State of UP, (2022) 18 SCC 706; Arshad Neyaz 
Khan v. State of Jharkhand, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2058; Shashank Garg v. State and Ors., 2025 SCC 
OnLine Del 2455. 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
591
Narayana Health & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
4. Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a 
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable 
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer 
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under 
Section 155(2) of the Code.
5. Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint 
are so absurd and inherently improbable, on the basis of 
which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion 
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the 
accused.
6. Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any 
of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under 
which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution 
and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there 
is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, 
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the 
aggrieved party.
7. Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended 
with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously 
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance 
on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private 
and personal grudge.”
11.	 The complainant alleged commission of offences under Sections 405, 
420 and 120B, IPC in his complaint. For criminal breach of trust under 
Section 405, IPC, it is necessary that there must be entrustment of 
property to the accused; such entrustment must create a fiduciary 
obligation regarding the handling or use of that property; and the 
accused must have dishonestly misappropriated or converted the 
entrusted property.4 Applying these principles to the present case, the 
allegations in the complaint indicate that the amount of Rs. 2,500/- 
was paid by the complainant as part of the hospital bill towards 
charges for an HRCT test, at the time of discharge of the patient. 
The complaint does not contain any averment that the amount in 
question was entrusted to the hospital to be held or utilised for a 
fiduciary or trust-based purpose, nor does it refer to any legal or 
4	
 Sadhupati Nageswara Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, (2012) 8 SCC 547; Prof. RK Vijayasarathy v. 
Sudha Seetharam, (2019) 16 SCC 739. 

592
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
contractual stipulation governing the manner in which such amount 
was required to be dealt with or any other averment to show as 
to how Section 405, IPC is made out. Furthermore, upon mistake 
being pointed out, the hospital had offered to refund the amount 
wrongly charged. Thus, in the absence of entrustment, dishonest 
misappropriation, or violation of a fiduciary obligation, foundational 
ingredients of the offence of criminal breach of trust as enshrined 
in Section 405, IPC are not satisfied.
12.	 For the offence of cheating under Section 420, IPC there must be 
deception on part of the accused from the very beginning; such 
deception must lead to fraudulent or dishonest inducement; and the 
accused must have had dishonest intention at the time the inducement 
was made.5 The allegation in the complaint is merely that the bill issued 
by the hospital reflected charge for a test that was not performed. 
Once the issue of wrong charge was raised by the complainant, 
the hospital communicated its decision to refund the amount. The 
discrepancy in billing appears to be more of an inadvertence, than 
a case of dishonest intention on part of the hospital. We are of the 
opinion that the allegation of cheating is completely misplaced. 
13.	 For the offence of criminal conspiracy under Section 120B, IPC there 
must be a prior agreement or meeting of minds for commission of 
an illegal act or a lawful act by illegal means.6 Moreover, where the 
foundational offences are not disclosed, a charge of conspiracy 
premised upon those offences ordinarily cannot stand independently.7 
Since the allegations regarding offences of criminal breach of trust 
and cheating are virtually non-existent, the incidental allegation of 
criminal conspiracy is unsustainable. Furthermore, the complaint 
named not just the hospital and its staff but also the corporate 
entity running it and its Chairman. There is nothing in the complaint 
indicating a prior agreement, concerted plan, or meeting of minds 
among the accused persons to commit an unlawful act. 
14.	 The complainant had also alleged improper conduct by the fourth 
appellant and the third respondent, employees of the hospital, 
as has been noticed in the impugned judgement as well. The 
5	
Joseph Salvaraj A. v. State of Gujarat, (2011) 7 SCC 59; Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P., (2003) 3 SCC 11; 
Alpic Finance Ltd. v. P. Sadasivan, (2001) 3 SCC 513. 
6	
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu, (2005) 11 SCC 600.
7	
R.K. Vijayasarathy (supra).

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
593
Narayana Health & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
allegations in the complaint relate to the alleged statements made 
by them discouraging the complainant from pursuing the matter any 
further. There is nothing more to this averment and it is important to 
note that neither the complaint nor the summoning order refers to 
commission of an offence under Section 503, IPC. The High Court 
while remanding the matter, on its own makes an observation that, 
“the aforesaid act of the two accused persons prima facie do make 
out an offence under Section 504 of the Indian Penal Code” and that 
“offence has been made out”. We are of the opinion that there was 
no occasion for the High Court to construe the general averments 
and elevate them to the commission of an offence under Section 
504 and then observe that offence has been made out. 
15.	 In view of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that the 
allegations made in the complaint, even if assumed to be true in their 
entirety and accepted at face value, fail to disclose the commission of 
any offence under the Sections invoked against the accused persons.
16.	 The complaint also alleged grievance about non-supply or delay in 
supply of medical records. We are of the opinion that the allegation 
falls short of a criminal offence and could at the most give rise to 
some kind of a claim in civil law or a statutory requirement under 
West Bengal Clinical Establishment (Registration, Regulation & 
Transparency) Act, 2017 or the Indian Medical Council (Professional 
Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002. However, the 
complaint only refers to the commission of offence under Section 34 
of the West Bengal Clinical Establishment (Registration, Regulation & 
Transparency) Act, 2017.
17.	 The above referred 2017 Act is intended to regulate the functioning 
of clinical establishments within the State, ensure transparency 
in medical services, standardise treatment protocols, and provide 
mechanisms for grievance redressal in matters relating to patient 
care, billing practices and service standards. Duties of clinical 
establishments such as the appellant hospital is declared in Section 
7(3) of the 2017 Act, which is as follows:
“7. Conditions for registration and license: 
….
(3) Every license granted under sub-section (1) shall be 
subject to the following terms and conditions:— 

594
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(c) that the clinical establishment shall not resort to any 
unethical or unfair trade practices including unfair pricing 
for different services; 
(e) that such information is to be displayed and in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 
(g) that such medical and other reports, records and 
documents shall be made available to the licensing 
authority or the service recipient or his representative on 
demand, as may be prescribed; 
(l) that every clinical establishment shall maintain a Public 
Grievance Cell for lodging of any complaint regarding 
treatment, improper billing, deficit in service, attending 
staffs’ behaviour etc. and for redressal thereof; 
(m) that every clinical establishment shall set up a proper 
Help Desk to maintain regular and proper communication 
with the service recipients or their representatives regarding 
treatment, recipient’s condition, regular billing etc. and for 
their proper counseling; 
(n) that every clinical establishment shall immediately after 
coming into force of this Act, implement e-Prescription, 
maintain Electronic Medical Records and provide a set 
of all medical records and treatment details along with 
the discharge summary at the time of discharge of the 
service recipient; 
(o) that every clinical establishment shall strictly follow the 
fixed rates and charges including the Package Rates for 
investigation, bed charges, operation theatre procedures, 
Intensive Care, ventilation, implants, consultation and 
similar tests and procedures, and any additional treatment 
or procedure shall not attract additional charges over and 
above such fixed rates and charges including the Package 
Rates; 
(p) that every clinical establishment shall provide proper 
estimates for treatments not covered in fixed rates and 
charges including the Package Rates, to the service 
recipients or representative of service recipients during 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
595
Narayana Health & Ors. v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.
initiation or due course of treatment, and final bills shall 
not exceed estimates by a certain percentage, as may be 
prescribed by the Government; 
…”
18.	 The 2017 Act provides remedies against violations and excesses by 
clinical establishments by establishing an adjudicatory mechanism. 
Section 35 provides for the appointment of an Adjudicating Authority 
to address grievances concerning patient care services, billing 
irregularities, non-supply of records, and service deficiencies. Under 
Section 36, the West Bengal Clinical Establishment Regulatory 
Commission is established to supervise, adjudicate, and compensate 
the consumers/patients. 
19.	 While Section 29 provides for imposition of major and minor penalties 
for deficiencies8, Section 34 provides for criminal liability for declared 
offences and prescribes punishments.9 In other words, the legislative 
scheme clearly establishes that disputes concerning billing practices, 
supply of medical records, or service-related grievances are primarily 
intended to be addressed as deficiencies for which compensation is 
payable, if found to be true. Without even indicating as to how and 
in which manner the criminal offence has been committed, it is not 
permissible for the complainant to proceed with prosecution by just 
mentioning Section 34 in the complaint. We do not deny the fact 
that that complainant may have certain service-related grievances 
8	
“29.	 Minor and major deficiencies: 
(1) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder resulting in such minor 
deficiencies, that do not pose any imminent danger to the health and safety of any patient or public and 
can be rectified within a reasonable time, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees. 
(2) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder resulting in such major 
deficiencies, that pose an imminent danger to the health and safety of any member of the public or 
patient and which cannot be rectified within a reasonable time, shall be liable to a penalty which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section “minor deficiencies and major deficiencies” shall have such 
meaning as may be prescribed.”
9	
“34. Offences and punishments: 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if any person— 
(a) violates the conditions of registration and license under this Act, he shall be liable for imprisonment 
which may extend to three years; or 
(b) causes death or injury of patient or service recipients due to negligence, shall be liable to punishment 
as provided in the Indian Penal Code, 1860. 
(2) The prosecution, trial etc. for the purpose of sub-section (1) shall be as per the provision contained 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.”

596
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and these could be addressed under Section 29 of the 2017 Act. 
In view of the above, we are of the opinion that no criminal offence 
even under Section 34 of the 2017 Act is made out.
20.	 Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that 
this is a fit case for exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of CrPC 
to quash the criminal complaint and we are equally of the opinion 
that the High Court has failed to exercise such a power. In this view 
of the matter, we allow these appeals and set aside the judgement 
and order passed by the High Court in C.R.R. No. 967 of 2021 with 
CRAN No. 1 of 2021, dated 16.05.2023 and quash the Complaint 
Case No. C-533 of 2021. 
21.	 Quashing of the above referred criminal complaint will have no 
bearing on the civil or statutory remedies that the complainant may 
exercise in accordance with law. 
22.	 We place on record the assistance rendered by Mr. Gagan Gupta, 
learned Senior Advocate; along with Mr. Abhinay Sharma, Advocate 
on Record; Ms. Kirti Vyas, Advocate; and Mr. Kartik Rajpurohit, 
Advocate. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
