[2026] 6 S.C.R. 354 : 2026 INSC 498
New India Assurance Company Limited
v.
Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
(Civil Appeal No. 7938 of 2026)
15 May 2026
[Sanjay Karol* and Vipul M. Pancholi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the amount of money received as Mediclaim, in terms 
of a mediclaim policy, is deductible from an award passed by a 
Claims Tribunal or not.
Headnotes†
Motor Vehicles Act 1988 – ss.166, 168 – Amount received 
as mediclaim/medical insurance not deductible from 
compensation awarded by Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal 
(MACT) – High Court by way of the impugned judgment held 
that the amount received by a claimant by way of his mediclaim, 
is not deductible when such a claimant is before the MACT 
seeking compensation for injuries suffered as a result of an 
accident – Challenge to, by the appellant-insurer:
Held: Amount received as part of Mediclaim/medical insurance is 
not deductible from compensation as calculated by the concerned 
Tribunal, adjudicating a claim for compensation under the MVA 
which may also include compensation under the head of medical 
expenses, if claimed – These two stand on a different footing – 
One is statutory while the other is contractual and the latter is 
only a sequitur of premiums having been paid in the past while 
the other is an entitlement as a consequence of an accident 
or death in a motor vehicle accident – A Mediclaim policy is a 
policy purchased by a person, accounting for the uncertainties 
of life and preparing a financial base for an unfortunate possible 
eventuality – It doesn’t specifically deal with accidental coverage 
only – Therefore, the contractual benefit of reimbursement of 
medical expenses as a result of this policy is, independent of 
any other claim – The provisions of the MVA are only triggered 
in the unfortunate eventuality if a death or injury arising out of a 
motor vehicle accident occurs – That in itself, when it does arise, 
* Author

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
355
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
cannot eclipse the contractual benefit to which a person who has 
paid premiums, is entitled too – Compensation under MVA while 
it recognizes reimbursement of medical expenses is distinct from 
the contractual benefit, though it may be with respect to the very 
same heads – Only because they appear same or similar, they 
cannot be termed as “double benefit” – Amount received under 
MVA arises from a beneficial legislation and as guided by just 
compensation which is intended to put the injured or the claimants 
(legal representatives of the deceased) in a position, as far as 
possible, at least monetarily, if the accident in question had not 
taken place – Naturally, this stands on a higher pedestal not only 
because it is a statutory entitlement of compensation but also 
because the nature of the statute is entirely beneficial – Matter 
remanded to High Court for making a determination consistent 
with the present opinion. [Paras 9-11, 15, 16]
Ethics – Legal Ethics – Duty of Advocates/Counsels towards 
Court – To bring to the Court’s notice judgments both that 
aid their case and also those that do not – Whether the 
amount received by a claimant by way of his Mediclaim, is 
deductible when such a claimant is before the MACT seeking 
compensation for injuries suffered as a result of an accident – 
Contrary positions of law taken by same High Court, whether 
it be by the benches of the same strength or by the benches 
of lesser strength in ignorance of pronouncements made by 
the benches of higher strength:
Held: When such inconsistencies are left unaddressed, it leads to 
various problems, primary among them being judicial inconsistency 
and uncertainty – Counsel appearing in Court to plead the case 
of a particular party making all effort possible, while balancing 
ethics and their duty towards the Court, to secure a victory for their 
clients – It is this duty towards the Court which requires them to 
bring to the Court’s notice judgments both that aid their case and 
also those that do not – It is here that the counsel’s awareness of 
law and grasp on facts are their greatest assets, enabling them 
to distinguish judgments that may seemingly be against them and 
still secure a favourable order – This duty is all the more important 
in the present day because all the Courts are polyvocal – Tens of 
orders and judgments are pronounced every day across a range 
of issues and so, the Court before which they are appearing may 
not be aware of the latest pronouncement – They must disclose 

356
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the same to the Court ensuring consistency – That being so, 
the entire burden cannot be placed only on counsel – The Court 
itself has an independent tri-fold duty, to apply correct law even 
if the counsel does not cite the same, ensure consistency with 
precedent, and avoid per incuriam decisions – While this duty 
is one part of reality, a Court hearing nearly hundred matters a 
day and in some cases across a variety of laws and jurisdictions, 
having to dictate daily orders, write judgments and so much more, 
is the other part – So, in essence, both the Bar and the Bench 
are responsible for minimising the problems that arise in the face 
of inconsistent judicial opinion – They are both constituents of 
the justice delivery system, and all actions must be guided by 
a sense of service to the system, further facilitating reduction of 
pendency – Justice Delivery System – Role of the Bar and the 
Bench. [Paras 13, 14]
Motor Accident Claims – Grant of both MACT Compensation 
and Mediclaim – Distinction between statutory and contractual 
entitlements – Principle of “double benefit” – Inapplicability:
Held: 1.1 The principle governing “double benefit” in motor accident 
claims is that there should be no duplication for the same head of 
loss in respect of the victim/claimant in a claim petition arising out of 
a motor vehicle accident – A claimant cannot recover compensation 
twice for the same injury or loss, as that would amount to unjust 
enrichment – Compensation must be “just compensation” which 
is meant to fairly make good the loss suffered, not to create a 
windfall – Therefore, where two payments in relation to the very 
same claim petition compensate for the same loss, one of them 
must ordinarily be adjusted or deducted. [Para 7.1] 
1.2 What is to be examined is the source and nature of the 
benefit – The primary consideration in such an analysis is whether 
the additional benefit is a substitute for the same loss, in which 
case it is liable to be deducted, or whether it is independent, or 
an entitlement, in which case it is not – For instance, where the 
family of a deceased person receives statutory compensation or 
ex gratia payment from the State on account of death, such amount 
may be deducted from the compensation awarded under MACT 
as both payments are addressing the same loss – Similarly, where 
one aspect of compensation directly replaces the same income 
stream lost due to the accident, and is triggered by that very event, 
permitting full recovery under both heads would amount to double 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
357
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
compensation – However, the position is different where the benefit 
is independent in nature. [Paras 7.2, 7.2.1] 
1.3 The contractual benefit of reimbursement of medical expenses 
as a result of this policy is, therefore, independent of any other 
claim  – The provisions of the MVA are only triggered in the 
unfortunate eventuality if a death or injury arising out of a motor 
vehicle accident occurs – If the view of the High Courts that this 
would amount to “double benefit” is agreed to, a peculiar situation 
will arise – On the one end, it may save compensation from being 
affected by double benefit, but on the other, it would denude the 
claimant of the benefits that arise out of them parting with their 
hard-earned money in the form of Mediclaim premiums – It would 
also amount to an undue advantage to the company granting 
the Mediclaim policy to the claimant if the claimant’s claim is 
extinguished by the award of the MACT having granted medical 
expenses for, they would have received the premium but would 
not be required to pay any amount in the event of medical bills 
having arisen – Similarly, it may amount to an unjust benefit to 
the insurer of the offending vehicle if they are not required to 
compensate under one of the heads of medical expenses solely 
on account of the fact that the claimant had received the benefit 
of a policy for which they had been paying premiums for years 
on end. [Para 10]
1.4 Further, the guiding yardstick in Mediclaim vis-à-vis MVA is 
different – In the former, a Mediclaim policy is taken up to a certain 
amount and if the claim of the policy holder once found to be holding 
merit go beyond it, the holder has no option but to foot the bill out 
of pocket however in the latter, because of its beneficial nature the 
only guide is the broad principle of just and fair compensation – 
The compensation that may be awarded thereunder has no strict 
monetary limits. [Para 10]
Motor Accident Claims – Law on deductions from motor 
accident claims, discussed. [Paras 8-8.5]
Case Law Cited
Reliance General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shashi Sharma [2016] 6 
SCR 488 : (2016) 9 SCC 627; Helen C. Rebello v. Maharashtra 
SRTC [1998] Supp. 1 SCR 684 : (1999) 1 SCC 90; Oriental 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. R. Swaminathan, CA 2715 of 2002; United 
India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Patricia Jean Mahajan [2002] 3 SCR 

358
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
1176 : (2002) 6 SCC 281; Sebastiani Lakra v. National Insurance 
Co. Ltd. [2018] 13 SCR 1053 : (2019) 17 SCC 465; National 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Pranay Sethi [2017] 13 SCR 100 : (2017) 
16 SCC 680 – referred to.
The New India Assurance v. Dineshchandra Shantilal Shah and Ors. 
(2013) 09 BOM CK 0240 (First Appeal No.657 of 2013); Vrajesh 
Navnitlal Desai v. K. Bagyam and Anr., 2005 SCC OnLine Bom 156; 
Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Ajit Chandrakant 
Rakvi, 2019 SCC OnLine Bom 496; State of Goa  v. Michael 
Joaquim F.D. Souza, 2022 SCC OnLine Bom 1672; United India 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Anjana, 2012 SCC OnLine Bom 129; Reliance 
General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Aman Sanjay Tak, 2023 SCC OnLine 
Bom 883; Madhya Pradesh State Road Trans. Corpn. v. Priyank, 
1999 SCC OnLine MP 18 Mamta Yadav v. Amrat Singh, 2023 SCC 
OnLine MP 7166; Shaheed Ahmed v. Shankaranarayana Bhat, 
2008 SCC OnLine Kar 166 [Kar. HC]; Royal Sundram General 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Meenakshi Mann, 2019 SCC OnLine P&H 
7801 [Punjab & Haryana HC]; New India Assurance Company 
Limited v. Bimal Kumar Shah, 2018 SCC OnLine Cal 10368 [Cal. 
HC]; National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Bijumon, 2010 SCC OnLine 
Ker 4775 [Ker. HC]; National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Aman Kapur, 
2013 SCC OnLine Del 4891 [Del. HC]; Jaswant Kaur Sethi v. 
Tamal Das, MAC. APP. No. 352 of 2006; National Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. R.K. Jain, 2012 SCC OnLine Del 3303; National Insurance 
Co. v. Deepmala Goel, 2012 SCC OnLine Del 1958; IFFCO Tokio 
General Insurance Co. v. Kisanlal Sharma, 2019 SCC OnLine 
Del 11091; IFFCO Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shambhu 
Pathak, 2012 SCC OnLine Del 1361; National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Shiela Avinashi, 2012 SCC OnLine Del 532; Bajaj Allianze General 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Ganpat Rai Sehgal, 2012 SCC OnLine Del 42; 
UP State Road Transport Corporation v. Rama Chugh, 2019 SCC 
OnLine Del 11627; New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Arjun Singh, 
2019 SCC OnLine Del 11625; Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Ravi 
Jain, 2025 SCC OnLine Del 8966; National Insurance Company 
Ltd. v. Akber Badsha, 2015 SCC OnLine Ker 26742; Mariamma 
James v. Alphones Antony, 2016 SCC OnLine Ker 29226; National 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shashank Bhardwaj, CWP No. 9763 of 
2015; ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co. v. Harminder Singh 
Rosha, FAO No. 4755 of 2016; United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Jaswant Singh, FAO No. 532 of 2014; The New India Assurance 
Co. v. Dineshchandra Shantilal Shah & Ors. First Appeal No. 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
359
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
657 of 2013; Shirkant @ Srikant Kashinath Gaude v. Suryakant 
Uttam Gaude. F.A. No. 64 of 2009; S. Sevagi v. State of Express 
Transport, C.M.A. Nos. 3618–3620 of 2013; Jitendra v. Rahul, 
MANU/MP/0366/2008 – referred to.	
Bradburn v. Great Western Railway Co (1874-80) All ER Rep 
195 – referred to.
List of Acts
Motor Vehicles Act 1988.
List of Keywords
Motor Accident Claims; Mediclaim; Mediclaim policy; Medical 
insurance; Mediclaim reimbursement; Mediclaim/medical insurance 
not deductible from compensation; Compensation under MVA; 
Compensation awarded by MACT; Mediclaim not deductible from 
award passed by MACT; Statutory entitlement of compensation; 
Beneficial legislation; Just compensation; Principle of “double 
benefit; Grant of MACT compensation and Mediclaim; Not double 
benefit; Contractual benefit; Reimbursement of medical expenses; 
Contractual benefit; Contractual benefit of reimbursement of 
medical expenses; MVA beneficial legislation; Legal Ethics; Duty 
of Advocates/Counsels; Duty of Advocates towards Court; Bring 
judgments to the Court’s notice; Judicial inconsistency; Judicial 
uncertainty; Inconsistent judicial opinion; Justice delivery system; 
Role of Bar and Bench; Deductions from motor accident claims; 
Mediclaim premiums.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 7938 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.03.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in FA No. 1344 of 2014
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Aditya Kumar, Ms. Ila Nath, C. George Thomas.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Anand Dilip Landge, Mrs. Sangeeta Nenwani, Ms. Revati Pravin 
Kharde, Shreenivas Patil, Rahul Prakash Pathak.

360
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
Leave Granted.
THE APPEAL
2.	
‘A’ met with an accident. They filed a claim before the jurisdictional 
Tribunal i.e., Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal1 seeking compensation 
in which inter alia, loss of income, future prospects, special diet, 
transportation and medical expenses have been claimed for. 
Simultaneously, claims set out with insurance under the claim of 
medical insurance for the very same medical expenses are allowed 
and money received. Is it legally permissible for the MACT to account 
for such amounts received, and as such deduct the same or not, is 
the question involved herein. 
3.	
A Bench of three Judges of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay 
in deciding a conflict between judgments of the said Court, namely 
The New India Assurance v. Dineshchandra Shantilal Shah and 
Ors2, on the one hand, and Vrajesh Navnitlal Desai v. K. Bagyam 
and Anr3., Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Co. Ltd., Kolkata v. 
Ajit Chandrakant Rakvi and Anr4, on the other, in terms of the 
impugned judgment, held that the amount received by a claimant by 
way of his own Mediclaim, is not deductible when such a claimant 
is before the jurisdictional MACT seeking compensation for injuries 
he has suffered as a result of an accident. New India Assurance Co. 
Ltd., is aggrieved and questions the correctness of such a finding 
before us, in this appeal. 
3.1	 We are, therefore, to decide the question of law as to whether 
the amount of money received as Mediclaim, in terms of a 
ediclaim policy, is deductible from an award passed by a Claims 
1	
MACT
2	
(2013) 09 BOM CK 0240 (First Appeal No.657 of 2013)
3	
2005 SCC OnLine Bom 156
4	
2019 SCC OnLine Bom 496

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
361
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
Tribunal or not. The factual matrix in which this question arises 
does not have a bearing on the conclusion of this question of 
law, and hence, is not relevant for the present determination. 
ARGUMENTS OF THE PARTIES
4.	
We heard the learned Counsel for the parties. 
4.1	 Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted:
4.1.1	 It is an admitted position that the respondent-insured has 
already been reimbursed for medical expenses through 
a Mediclaim policy. Once such reimbursement has taken 
place, the loss under that specific head is neutralized and 
so, awarding the same amount again under the head of 
medical expenses would go beyond restitution and lead to 
or result in a duplication of benefit. The appellant-insurer 
has submitted this position to be inconsistent with the 
principle of just compensation.
4.1.2	 This position, it is argued, has found support in the 
decision of this Court in Reliance General Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Shashi Sharma5, where the Court emphasised that 
double benefits should not be granted while computing 
compensation in reference to a claim petition arising out of 
a motor vehicle accident. In that case, amounts received 
by the claimants by way of ex gratia financial assistance 
have been held liable for deduction from compensation 
awarded under a corresponding head. The underlying 
rationale was that overlapping benefits under the same 
head distort the concept of just compensation.
4.1.3	 The appellant-insurer also dealt with the judgment in 
Helen C. Rebello v. Maharashtra SRTC6, which held 
that benefits such as life insurance, provident fund 
and pension, are not deductible since they accrue 
independently of the accident and would be payable in 
any event. However, the appellant-insurer has submitted 
that the present case stands on a different footing. A 
5	
(2016) 9 SCC 627
6	
(1999) 1 SCC 90

362
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Mediclaim reimbursement is directly linked to the injury 
sustained in the accident and has arisen only because 
of the medical expenses incurred due to that event. 
Unlike life insurance proceeds, it is not a benefit that 
accrues irrespective of the accident. Even on the principle 
articulated in Helen Rebello (supra) amounts that bear 
a direct causal connection with the loss in question are 
liable to be adjusted to avoid duplication.
4.1.4	 The statutory framework has also supported this position. 
Under Sections 146 and 147 of the Motor Vehicles 
Act 19887, insurance against third party risk has been 
mandatory, and the insurer has been required to indemnify 
the owner or driver for liability arising from death or 
bodily injury caused by the use of the vehicle. However, 
such liability has been premised on the existence of an 
actual loss. If the medical expenses have already been 
reimbursed, the question arisen is whether any liability 
survives in respect of that head. The appellant-insurer 
has submitted that in the absence of a subsisting loss, 
there can be no corresponding liability to compensate.
4.1.5	 It has further been submitted that the distinction between 
statutory and contractual liability, as discussed in Helen 
Rebello (supra) has arisen in the context of death cases 
where certain pecuniary advantages have accrued to the 
dependents independently of the accident. In contrast, 
the present matter has involved an injury claim where the 
reimbursement of medical expenses has been directly and 
exclusively connected to the accident. This has created a 
clear overlap between the loss claimed and the amount 
already received, making it a case where the principle 
against double recovery applies with full force.
4.1.6	 The appellant-insurer has also relied on the decision 
in Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. R. Swaminathan8, 
where this Court has approved the deduction of 
medical expenses that had already been reimbursed 
7	
MVA
8	
CA 2715 of 2002

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
363
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
by the employer. Even though the Court had enhanced 
compensation under other heads, it consciously did not 
award medical expenses again, recognizing that such 
duplication is impermissible.
4.2	 Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent – insured 
contended:
4.2.1	 There exists a distinction between statutory and 
contractual entitlements. Compensation under the MVA 
is a statutory right that arises upon proof of negligence 
and resulting injury. It is not contingent upon any prior 
contribution by the claimant. In contrast, a Mediclaim 
policy constitutes a contract of insurance, supported 
by the payment of premiums and governed by agreed 
terms. The respondent-insured submits that these two 
entitlements operate in separate domains, and that the 
statutory right to compensation cannot be diminished 
by importing considerations arising from a contractual 
benefit.
4.3	 In Helen Rebello (supra) the Court held that amounts such 
as provident fund, pension, and life insurance proceeds are 
not liable to be deducted from compensation under the MVA, 
as they bear no correlation to the accident. The respondent – 
insured, submits that the governing principle emerging 
therefrom is that deductions are permissible only where a 
direct nexus exists between the receipt and the accident 
giving rise to the claim.
4.3.1	 This principle was reiterated in United India Insurance 
Co. Ltd. v. Patricia Jean Mahajan9, where the Court 
held that insurance proceeds and other benefits cannot 
be deducted unless they are directly attributable to 
the accidental death or injury. The respondent insured 
submits that a broad interpretation encompassing 
all post-accident receipts would defeat the object of 
awarding just compensation and unjustly benefit the 
wrongdoer.
9	
(2002) 6 SCC 281

364
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
4.3.2	 Further reliance is placed on Sebastiani Lakra v. National 
Insurance Co. Ltd.10, where the Court reaffirmed that 
benefits arising from contractual or service-related 
entitlements, including insurance, pension, and gratuity, 
cannot be deducted from compensation. The respondent 
insured contends that such benefits accrue independently 
of the accident and cannot be treated as gains arising 
from the same cause.
4.3.3	 The respondent-insured also submits that the principle 
recognised in Bradburn v. Great Western Railway Co11 
affirms that damages payable by a wrongdoer are not to 
be reduced on account of insurance benefits received 
by the injured party. This ensures that the appellant 
insurer or the tortfeasor does not derive advantage 
from the prudence of the claimant in securing insurance 
coverage.
4.3.4	 Turning to the statutory framework, the respondent-
insured submits that the MVA is a beneficial legislation 
intended to provide relief to victims of motor accidents. 
Section 166 confers the right to claim compensation, 
while Section 168 obligates the Tribunal, to award just 
compensation based on fairness, reasonableness, and 
equity. As elucidated in National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Pranay Sethi12, the determination of just compensation 
must strike a balance and reflect a realistic assessment 
of loss. The respondent insured contends that deducting 
Mediclaim benefits would undermine this objective and 
result in inadequate compensation.
4.3.5	 In response to the contentions of the appellant-insurer, 
it is submitted that no prejudice or irreparable loss is 
caused by allowing the respondent-insured to receive both 
contractual and statutory benefits. The liability under the 
MVA arises from the wrongful act of the driver, whereas 
10	
(2019) 17 SCC 465
11	
(1874-80) All ER Rep 195
12	
(2017) 16 SCC 680

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
365
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
the liability under the Mediclaim policy arises from a 
contract supported by consideration. The respondent-
insured submits that these liabilities are distinct and 
coexist without overlap and that the appellant- insurer 
retains the ability to adjust premiums in accordance with 
risk.
4.4	 It should be noted that in the course of arguments, learned 
counsel for the appellant pointed out that there were contrarian 
views galore on this question, and that the question needed 
to be settled, specifically in the context of Mediclaim/medical 
insurance. 
ANALYZING DIVERGENT VIEWS 
5.	
We find, somewhat surprisingly, that single judges as also division 
benches even of the same Court, have taken opposite views across 
the High Courts. One view is that Mediclaim, as a claim is independent 
from a claim under Section 166 MVA and the award received need 
not be deducted. In a tabular form we further take notice of such a 
view taken by the High Court(s).
BOMBAY HIGH COURT CASES
1.
Vrajesh Navnitlal Desai v. K. Bagyam, 
2005 SCC OnLine Bom 156
1J
2.
Royal Sundaram Alliance Insurance Co. Ltd. 
v. Ajit Chandrakant Rakvi, 
2019 SCC OnLine Bom 496
1J
3.
State of Goa v. Michael Joaquim F.D. Souza, 
2022 SCC OnLine Bom 1672
1J
4.
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Anjana, 2012 
SCC OnLine Bom 129
1J
5.
Reliance General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Aman 
Sanjay Tak, 2023 SCC OnLine Bom 883
1J
MADHYA PRADESH HIGH COURT CASES
6.
Madhya Pradesh State Road Trans. Corpn. v. 
Priyank, 1999 SCC OnLine MP 18
2J
7.
Mamta Yadav v. Amrat Singh, 
2023 SCC OnLine MP 7166
1J

366
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
OTHER HIGH COURTS CASES
8.
Shaheed Ahmed v. Shankaranarayana Bhat, 
2008 SCC OnLine Kar 166
[Kar. HC]
1J
9.
Royal Sundram General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Meenakshi Mann, 2019 SCC OnLine P&H 7801
[Punjab & Haryana HC]
1J
10.
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Bimal 
Kumar Shah, 2018 SCC OnLine Cal 10368
[Cal. HC]
2J
11.
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Bijumon, 2010 
SCC OnLine Ker 4775 [Ker. HC]
1J
12.
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Aman Kapur, 
2013 SCC OnLine Del 4891 [Del. HC]
1J
6.	
The other view is that the amount received from a Mediclaim is in 
fact deductible from the total compensation, which in a tabular form 
we indicate the cases as under:- 
S. No.
Case Title
Bench 
Strength
DELHI HIGH COURT CASES
1.
Jaswant Kaur Sethi v. Tamal Das, MAC. APP. 
No. 352 of 2006
1J
2.
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. R.K. Jain, 2012 
SCC OnLine Del 3303
1J
3.
National Insurance Co.
v. Deepmala Goel, 2012 SCC OnLine Del 1958
1J
4.
IFFCO Tokio General Insurance Co. v.
Kisanlal Sharma, 2019 SCC OnLine Del 11091
[Claimant surrendered claim under medical 
expenses]
1J
5.
IFFCO Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Shambhu Pathak, 2012 SCC OnLine Del 1361
1J
6.
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shiela Avinashi, 
2012 SCC OnLine Del 532
1J

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
367
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
7.
Bajaj Allianze General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Ganpat Rai Sehgal, 2012 SCC OnLine Del 42
1J
8.
UP State Road Transport Corporation v. Rama 
Chugh, 2019 SCC OnLine Del 11627
1J
9.
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v. Arjun Singh, 
2019 SCC OnLine Del 11625
1J
10.
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Ravi Jain, 2025 
SCC OnLine Del 8966
1J
KERALA HIGH COURT CASES
11.
National Insurance Company Ltd. v. Akber 
Badsha, 2015 SCC OnLine Ker 26742
2J
12.
Mariamma James v. Alphones Antony, 2016 
SCC OnLine Ker 29226
2J
PUNJAB AND HARYANA HIGH COURT CASES
13.
National Insurance Co.
Ltd. v. Shashank Bhardwaj, CWP No. 9763 
of 2015
1J
14.
ICICI Lombard General Insurance Co. v.
Harminder Singh Rosha, FAO No. 4755 of 2016
1J
15.
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Jaswant 
Singh, FAO No. 532 of 2014
1J
BOMBAY HIGH COURT CASES
16.
The New India Assurance Co. v. Dineshchandra
Shantilal Shah & Ors. First Appeal No. 657 of 
2013
1J
17.
Shirkant @ Srikant Kashinath Gaude v. 
Suryakant Uttam Gaude. F.A. No. 64 of 2009
1J
MADRAS HIGH COURT CASES
18.
 S. Sevagi v. State of Express Transport, C.M.A. 
Nos. 3618–3620 of 2013
2J
MADHYA PRADESH HIGH COURT CASES
19.
 Jitendra vs. Rahul, MANU/MP/0366/2008
1J

368
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
OUR CONSIDERATION
7.	
Inter-alia, two opposing reasons come forth from the perusal of the 
above-mentioned High Court decisions. Those in favor of deduction 
hold so in view of the principle of “double benefit” since the same 
medical expenses would be compensated from two sources. Those 
against the deduction posit that the origin of the two methods of 
compensating the same is different and, therefore, it cannot be said 
to exclude each other. One is a statutory remedy and the other arises 
out of a contract. Let us understand the same.
7.1	 The principle governing “double benefit” in motor accident claims 
is that there should be no duplication for the same head of 
loss in respect of the victim/claimant in a claim petition arising 
out of a motor vehicle accident. A claimant cannot recover 
compensation twice for the same injury or loss, as that would 
amount to unjust enrichment. The unquestionable position is 
that compensation must be “just compensation” which is meant 
to fairly make good the loss suffered, not to create a windfall. 
Therefore, where two payments in relation to the very same 
claim petition compensate for the same loss, one of them must 
ordinarily be adjusted or deducted. 
7.2	 What is to be examined is the source and nature of the benefit. 
The primary consideration in such an analysis is whether the 
additional benefit is a substitute for the same loss, in which 
case it is liable to be deducted, or whether it is independent, or 
an entitlement, in which case it is not. For instance, where the 
family of a deceased person receives statutory compensation 
or ex gratia payment from the State on account of death, such 
amount may be deducted from the compensation awarded 
under MACT. The reasoning therefor, is straightforward. Both 
payments are addressing the same loss. Similarly, where one 
aspect of compensation directly replaces the same income 
stream lost due to the accident, and is triggered by that very 
event, permitting full recovery under both heads would amount 
to double compensation.
7.2.1	 However, the position is different where the benefit is 
independent in nature. It has repeatedly been clarified 
by this Court that certain payments cannot be deducted 
merely because they accrue upon death. Employment 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
369
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
benefits such as provident funds, gratuity, and pension 
are not deductible, as they arise from the contract of 
employment and represent deferred earnings or accrued 
rights. They are not compensation for the accident, but 
entitlements earned over time.
7.3	 Let us now look at the primary reason taken by those who have 
favoured the grant of both MACT compensation and Mediclaim. 
7.3.1	 A statutory benefit is an entitlement that exists because 
a law creates it. Its source is legislation enacted by the 
State, and not any private agreement between individuals. 
Meeting the conditions laid down in the statute ipso facto, 
leads to entitlement. There is nothing required further such 
as negotiation or consent. Such benefits are generally 
in furtherance/fulfillment of broader public purposes like 
welfare, regulation, and they can be altered or withdrawn 
only if the law itself is amended. 
7.3.2	 A contractual benefit, on the other hand, is in the nature 
of a private agreement between parties. Its source is 
the contract itself, and the benefit flows from the parties 
having mutually agreed to certain terms. These benefits 
depend on consent and are defined by what the contract 
provides. They are enforceable under the law of contract 
and cannot be changed except in accordance with the 
terms of the agreement. 
7.3.3	 The distinction, put simply, is that a statutory benefit flows 
from the authority of law, while a contractual benefit flows 
from the will and agreement inter se parties. Naturally, 
statutory benefits are available to all persons, provided 
that they fulfill its prerequisites whereas a contractual 
benefit is limited inter se the parties.
8.	
Having noticed the crucial distinction, we now move to appreciating 
the law on deductions from motor accident claims. 
8.1	 Helen Rebello
In this case, the husband of the appellant was gravely injured 
while travelling on a bus of the Maharashtra State Road 
Transport Corporation, when it collided with a bus of the 
Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, while he was on 

370
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
his way from Rathore Badruk to Pune, eventually succumbing 
to the injuries sustained. The quantum of compensation was 
not subject matter of challenge before the co-ordinate Bench 
of this Court. The issue was whether the amount received 
by the appellant and other legal heirs in the form of the life 
insurance policy of the deceased was deductible from the 
compensation received under the 1939 version of the MVA. 
The Court, speaking through A.P Misra J., discussed a number 
of English cases and then observed that Section 110, of the 
1939 Act made clear that the constitution of the Tribunal was 
not meant to “include that which the claimant receives on 
account of other forms of deaths, which he would have received 
even apart from accidental death. Thus, such pecuniary 
advantage would have no correlation to the accidental death 
for which compensation is computed. Any amount received 
or receivable not only on account of the accidental death but 
that which would have come to the claimant even otherwise, 
could not be construed to be the “pecuniary advantage”, liable 
for deduction.” Observations made further ahead are also 
apposite for the present case:
“How thus an amount earned out of one’s labour 
or contribution towards one’s wealth, savings, etc. 
either for himself or for his family which such person 
knows under the law has to go to his heirs after his 
death either by succession or under a Will could be 
said to be the “pecuniary gain” only on account of 
one’s accidental death. This, of course, is a pecuniary 
gain but how this is equitable or could be balanced 
out of the amount to be received as compensation 
under the Motor Vehicles Act. There is no corelation 
between the two amounts. Not even remotely. How 
can an amount of loss and gain of one contract be 
made applicable to the loss and gain of another 
contract. Similarly, how an amount receivable under 
a statute has any corelation with an amount earned 
by an individual. Principle of loss and gain has to 
be on the same plane within the same sphere, of 
course, subject to the contract to the contrary or any 
provisions of law.”

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
371
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
8.2	 Patricia Jean Mahajan 
This case concerned the death of an Indian origin, USA-based 
doctor who died while on a visit to this Country, travelling from 
Jaipur to Delhi. The Tribunal awarded a sum of Rs. 1.16 crores 
with 12% interest p.a., as against a claim of Rs. 54 Crores. The 
appellant challenged the determination before the High Court 
of Delhi. The compensation was enhanced to Rs. 16.12 crores 
with the said interest. Still further, the merits of the computation 
were challenged before this Court. Brijesh Kumar J., writing 
for the Court recorded agreement with the principle in Helen 
Rebello (supra). Considerable discussion was made in regard to 
transposing absolute numbers in terms of US earnings to India, 
applying the exchange rate thereto, and awarding compensation, 
but such a view was not entirely accepted in view of issues such 
as the possibility of over compensating, and also mechanical 
use of the multiplier, which would mean high multiplicand and 
high compensation on account of directly translating USD to 
its equivalent value in INR. It was observed:
“36. …. According to the decisions referred to in 
the earlier part of this judgment, it is clear that the 
amount on account of social security as may have 
been received must have a nexus or relation with 
the accidental injury or death, so far to be deductible 
from the amount of compensation. There must be 
some correlation between the amount received 
and the accidental death or it may be in the same 
sphere, absence (sic) the amount received shall 
not be deducted from the amount of compensation. 
Thus, the amount received on account of insurance 
policy of the deceased cannot be deducted from 
the amount of compensation though no doubt the 
receipt of the insurance amount is accelerated due 
to premature death of the insured. So far as other 
items in respect of which learned counsel for the 
Insurance Company has vehemently urged, for 
example some allowance paid to the children, and 
Mrs Patricia Mahajan under the social security system, 
no correlation of those receipts with the accidental 
death has been shown much less established. Apart 

372
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
from the fact that contribution comes from different 
sources for constituting the fund out of which payment 
on account of social security system is made, one of 
the constituents of the fund is tax which is deducted 
from income for the purpose. We feel that the High 
Court has rightly disallowed any deduction on account 
of receipts under the insurance policy and other 
receipts under the social security system which the 
claimant would have also otherwise been entitled 
to receive irrespective of accidental death of Dr 
Mahajan. If the proposition “receipts from whatever 
source” is interpreted so widely that it may cover all 
the receipts, which may come into the hands of the 
claimants, in view of the mere death of the victim, it 
would only defeat the purpose of the Act providing 
for just compensation on account of accidental death. 
Such gains, maybe on account of savings or other 
investment etc. made by the deceased, would not 
go to the benefit of the wrongdoer and the claimant 
should not be left worse off, if he had never taken 
an insurance policy or had not made investments 
for future returns.
(emphasis supplied)
8.3	 Shashi Sharma 
In this matter, the question that concerned the Court was 
whether compensation under MVA is affected by the grant of 
compensation under Haryana Compassionate Assistance to 
Dependents of deceased Government Employees Rules, 2006 
issued under Article 309 of the Constitution of India. It was held 
that since both these grounds of compensation have statutory 
force, claimants cannot be permitted to set up claims under both 
scenarios. The relevant discussion of the three-judge Bench is 
reproduced below:
“25. The claimants are legitimately entitled to claim 
for the loss of “pay and wages” of the deceased 
government employee against the tortfeasor or 
insurance company, as the case may be, covered 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
373
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
by the first part of Rule 5 under the 1988 Act. 
The claimants or dependants of the deceased 
government employee (employed by the State of 
Haryana), however, cannot set up a claim for the 
same subject falling under the first part of Rule 
5—“pay and allowances”, which are receivable by 
them from employer (the State) under Rule 5(1) of 
the 2006 Rules. In that, if the deceased employee 
was to survive the motor accident injury, he would 
have remained in employment and earned his regular 
pay and allowances. Any other interpretation of the 
said Rules would inevitably result in double payment 
towards the same head of loss of “pay and wages” 
of the deceased government employee entailing in 
grant of bonanza, largesse or source of profit to the 
dependants/claimants. Somewhat similar situation 
has been spelt out in Section 167 of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988 which reads thus:
“167. Option regarding claims for 
compensation in certain cases.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923) 
where the death of, or bodily injury to, any 
person gives rise to a claim for compensation 
under this Act and also under the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act, 1923, the person entitled 
to compensation may without prejudice to the 
provisions of Chapter X claim such compensation 
under either of those Acts but not under both.”
(emphasis supplied)
26. Indeed, similar statutory exclusion of claim 
receivable under the 2006 Rules is absent. That, 
however, does not mean that the Claims Tribunal 
should remain oblivious to the fact that the claim 
towards loss of pay and wages of the deceased has 
already been or will be compensated by the employer 
in the form of ex gratia financial assistance on 
compassionate grounds under Rule 5(1). The Claims 

374
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Tribunal has to adjudicate the claim and determine 
the amount of compensation which appears to it to 
be just. The amount receivable by the dependants/
claimants towards the head of “pay and allowances” 
in the form of ex gratia financial assistance, therefore, 
cannot be paid for the second time to the claimants. 
True it is, that the 2006 Rules would come into play 
if the government employee dies in harness even 
due to natural death. At the same time, the 2006 
Rules do not expressly enable the dependants of 
the deceased government employee to claim similar 
amount from the tortfeasor or insurance company 
because of the accidental death of the deceased 
government employee. The harmonious approach for 
determining a just compensation payable under the 
1988 Act, therefore, is to exclude the amount received 
or receivable by the dependants of the deceased 
government employee under the 2006 Rules towards 
the head financial assistance equivalent to “pay and 
other allowances” that was last drawn by the deceased 
government employee in the normal course. This is not 
to say that the amount or payment receivable by the 
dependants of the deceased government employee 
under Rule 5(1) of the Rules, is the total entitlement 
under the head of “loss of income”. So far as the claim 
towards loss of future escalation of income and other 
benefits is concerned, if the deceased government 
employee had survived the accident can still be 
pursued by them in their claim under the 1988 Act. 
For, it is not covered by the 2006 Rules...”
8.4	 Sebastiani Lakra
In this case, the Court while dealing with the total compensation 
payable to the claimants on account of the death of the 52 year 
old government servant, the question was whether the amount 
received by the claimants under the Employees Family Benefit 
Scheme13 being Rs.50,082/- per month should be deducted 
13	
EFB

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
375
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
from the compensation as calculated by the Tribunal. The High 
Court had allowed the deduction, however, did not provide any 
reasons for having taken such a view. This Court concluded 
that the case stood on a different footing from Shashi Sharma 
as the benefit herein was not statutory in nature. Further, it 
was observed that the amount payable under the EFB Scheme 
happens only once the benefits received by the legal heirs of 
the deceased are deposited. In other words, amounts of gratuity 
and all other benefits totaling to Rs.27,43,991/- were deposited 
and now they were receiving Rs.50,082/- per month till the date 
of retirement as would have been, of the deceased. The Court 
noted that this situation was beneficial for the claimants since, 
if the two amounts are compared, even a 12% interest rate on 
Rs.28,00,000/- approximately would be about Rs.22000/- less 
per month. The said amount, therefore, could not be deducted 
at the time of computation under MVA.
8.5	 Swaminathan
In this case, a co-ordinate Bench of this Court allowed an 
appeal filed by the Insurance Company being aggrieved by 
the increase of compensation beyond the original claimants 
ask. While this submission was rejected and it was held that 
the Court could increase the compensation beyond what had 
been asked for by the claimants, it was observed that the 
deduction of medical expenses by the learned Single Judge 
on account of the fact that the employer had already paid the 
same, was affirmed. We are, however, of the view that the 
holding in this case may not aid the appellant insurer herein 
for the reason that the observation made by this Court arose 
in a specific fact of the employer having reimbursing medical 
expenses. Neither reimbursement by the employer a general 
condition prevalent across cases, nor is it clear from the order 
of this Court whether the respondent in the said case had a 
Mediclaim policy to his name. 
9.	
Having considered judgments of this Court as above, we are of 
the considered opinion that the answer to the question raised in 
this appeal is not a matter of Sherlockian deduction. A Mediclaim 
policy is a policy that is purchased by a person, accounting for the 
uncertainties of life and preparing a financial base for an unfortunate 

376
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
possible eventuality. The human body is a coming together of intricate 
systems where there is always a possibility that something may go 
wrong or may need mending. In today’s time when medical expenses 
are skyrocketing for a variety of reasons, the ability to meet such 
expenses, suddenly as and when they may arise, is not something 
that rests with all. It is, as such, a necessary facet of preparation 
that people undertake. It doesn’t specifically deal with accidental 
coverage only. 
10.	 The contractual benefit of reimbursement of medical expenses as 
a result of this policy is, therefore, independent of any other claim. 
The provisions of the MVA are only triggered in the unfortunate 
eventuality if a death or injury arising out of a motor vehicle an 
accident occurs. That in itself, when it does arise, cannot eclipse 
the contractual benefit to which a person who has paid premiums, 
is entitled too. Compensation under MVA while it recognizes 
reimbursement of medical expenses is distinct from the contractual 
benefit, though it may be with respect to the very same heads. 
If the view of the High Courts that this would amount to “double 
benefit” is agreed to by this Court, a peculiar situation will arise. 
On the one end, it may save compensation from being affected by 
double benefit, if it can be called that, but on the other, it would 
denude the claimant of the benefits that arise out of them parting 
with their hard-earned money in the form of Mediclaim premiums. 
It would also amount to an undue advantage to the company 
granting the Mediclaim policy to the claimant if the claimant’s claim 
is extinguished by the award of the MACT having granted medical 
expenses for, they would have received the premium but would not 
be required to pay any amount in the event of medical bills having 
arisen. Similarly, it may amount to an unjust benefit to the insurer 
of the offending vehicle if they are not required to compensate 
under one of the heads of medical expenses solely on account of 
the fact that the claimant had received the benefit of a policy for 
which they had been paying premiums for years on end. There is 
yet another aspect. The guiding yardstick in Mediclaim vis a vis 
MVA is different. In the former, a Mediclaim policy is taken up to 
a certain amount and if the claim of the policy holder once found 
to be holding merit go beyond it, the holder has no option but 
to foot the bill out of pocket however in the latter, because of its 
beneficial nature the only guide is the broad principle of just and 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
377
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
fair compensation. Put differently, the compensation that may be 
awarded thereunder has no strict monetary limits. 
11.	 We may also say that looking at these two amounts as “double 
benefit” may not be appropriate since one situation is only the fruit 
of amounts already paid in the past. Only because they appear 
same or similar, they cannot be termed as “double benefit”. Still 
further there is another reason why these two amounts stand on 
a different footing. The amount received under MVA arises from a 
beneficial legislation and as guided by just compensation which is 
intended to put the injured or the claimants (legal representatives of 
the deceased) in a position, as far as possible, at least monetarily, if 
the accident in question had not taken place. Naturally, this stands 
on a higher pedestal - not only because it is a statutory entitlement 
of compensation but also because the nature of the statute is entirely 
beneficial. To equate these two amounts to pulling down the MVA 
or unnecessarily hyping up the Mediclaim policy.
A SECONDARY, BUT IMPORTANT ISSUE 
12.	 There is one other issue that we must address. The chart that is 
given in paras 4 and 5 of this judgment reveals something unsettling. 
There are contrary positions of law being taken by the same High 
Court, whether it be by the benches of the same strength or by the 
benches of lesser strength in ignorance of pronouncements made 
by the benches of higher strength. Some illustrations from the tables 
above are:
DELHI HIGH COURT CASES
Sl. No.
Mediclaim Not Granted
Bench 
Strength
Mediclaim 
Granted
Bench 
Strength
1.
Jaswant Kaur Sethi v. 
Tamal Das, MAC. APP. 
No. 352 of 2006
1J
National 
Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Aman 
Kapur, 2013 
SCC OnLine 
Del 4891
1J
2.
National Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. R.K. Jain, 2012 
SCC OnLine Del 3303
[Distinguishes Helen 
Rebello]
1J
3.
National Insurance Co.
v. Deepmala Goel, 2012 
SCC OnLine Del 1958
1J

378
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
4.
IFFCO Tokio General 
Insurance Co. v. Kisanlal 
Sharma, 2019 SCC 
OnLine Del 11091
[Claimant surrendered 
claim under medical 
expenses]
1J
5.
National Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Shiela Avinashi, 
2012 SCC OnLine Del 532
1J
6.
Bajaj Allianze General 
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Ganpat Rai Sehgal, 2012 
SCC OnLine Del 42
1J
7.
UP State Road Transport 
Corporation v. Rama 
Chugh, 2019 SCC OnLine 
Del 11627
1J
8.
New India Assurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Arjun Singh, 2019 
SCC OnLine Del 11625
1J
9.
Oriental Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Ravi Jain, 2025 
SCC OnLine Del 8966
1J
KERALA HIGH COURT CASES
10.
National Insurance 
Company Ltd. v. Akber 
Badsha, 2015 SCC OnLine 
Ker 26742
2J
National 
Insurance 
Co. Ltd. v. 
Bijumon, 2010 
SCC OnLine 
Ker 4775
1J
11.
Mariamma James v. 
Alphones Antony, 2016 
SCC OnLine Ker 29226
2J
PUNJAB AND HARYANA HIGH COURT CASES
12.
National Insurance Co.
Ltd. v. Shashank Bhardwaj, 
2016 SCC OnLine P&H 
19393
1J
Royal Sundram 
General 
Insurance 
Co. Ltd. v. 
Meenakshi 
Mann, 2019 
SCC OnLine 
P&H 7801
1J

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
379
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
13.
ICICI Lombard General 
Insurance Co. v.
Harminder Singh Rosha, 
2018 SCC OnLine P&H 7738
1J
14.
United India Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Jaswant Singh, FAO 
No. 532 of 2014
1J
15.
Vishal v. Bugga Singh, 
2016 SCC OnLine P&H 1338
1J
BOMBAY HIGH COURT CASES
16.
The New India Assurance 
Co. v. Dineshchandra
Shantilal Shah & Ors. First 
Appeal No. 657 of 2013
1J
Vrajesh 
Navnitlal Desai 
v. K. Bagyam, 
2005 SCC 
OnLine Bom 
156
1J
17.
Shirkant @ Srikant 
Kashinath Gaude v. 
Suryakant Uttam Gaude.
F.A. No. 64 of 2009
1J
Royal 
Sundaram 
Alliance 
Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Ajit 
Chandrakant 
Rakvi, 2019 
SCC OnLine 
Bom 496
1J
18.
State of Goa 
v. Michael 
Joaquim F.D. 
Souza, 2022 
SCC OnLine 
Bom 1672
1J
19.
United India 
Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Anjana, 
2012 SCC 
OnLine Bom 129
1J
20.
Reliance 
General 
Insurance Co. 
Ltd. v. Aman 
Sanjay Tak, 
2023 SCC 
OnLine Bom 883
1J

380
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
MADHYA PRADESH HIGH COURT CASES
21.
Jitendra vs. Rahul, MANU/
MP/0366/2008
1J
Madhya 
Pradesh State 
Road Trans. 
Corpn. v. 
Priyank, 1999 
SCC OnLine 
MP 18
2J
Mamta Yadav 
v. Amrat Singh, 
2023 SCC 
OnLine MP 
7166
1J
13.	 When such inconsistencies are left unaddressed, it leads to various 
problems, primary among them being that it leads to judicial 
inconsistency and uncertainty. This creates difficulties for counsel 
and the Court for, opposing judgments may give clients hope for 
differing outcomes or even for a Court in the future to have to examine 
multiple cases with differing opinions on the same point. Till such 
times the opposing views exist, judicial uncertainty is in play for 
settled precedents ensure definitive outcomes but if contrary views 
exist, it becomes a matter of choice to follow one and leave aside 
the other, and it remains no longer, a matter of law. Connected to 
this is its direct impact on judicial efficiency for if the law on a point is 
clear it is a matter of fair ease to follow settled precedents leading to 
a reduction in future effort thereby saving time. Performing a judicial 
duty or rendering justice which is certain, just, fair and expeditious.
14.	 When considering these issues, the roles both the Bar and the Bench 
must be addressed. Counsel appearing in Court to plead the case of 
a particular party making all effort possible, while balancing ethics and 
their duty towards the Court, to secure a victory for their clients. It is 
this duty towards the Court which requires them to bring to the Court’s 
notice judgments both that aid their case and also those that do not. 
It is here that the counsel’s awareness of law and grasp on facts are 
their greatest assets, enabling them to distinguish judgments that 
may seemingly be against them and still secure a favourable order. 
This duty is all the more important in the present day because all the 
Courts are polyvocal. Tens of orders and judgments are pronounced 
every day across a range of issues and so, the Court before which 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
381
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Dolly Satish Gandhi & Anr.
they are appearing may not be aware of the latest pronouncement. 
They must disclose the same to the Court ensuring consistency. 
That being so, the entire burden cannot be placed only on counsel. 
The Court itself has an independent tri-fold duty, to apply correct law 
even if the counsel does not cite the same, ensure consistency with 
precedent, and avoid per incuriam decisions. While this duty is one 
part of reality, a Court hearing nearly hundred matters a day and 
in some cases across a variety of laws and jurisdictions, having to 
dictate daily orders, write judgments and so much more, is the other 
part. So, in essence, both the Bar and the Bench are responsible for 
minimising the problems that arise in the face of inconsistent judicial 
opinion. They are both constituents of the justice delivery system, 
and all actions must be guided by a sense of service to the system, 
further facilitating reduction of pendency.
CONCLUSION
15.	 In fine, we hold that the amount received as part of Mediclaim/
medical insurance is not deductible from compensation as calculated 
by the concerned Tribunal, adjudicating a claim for compensation 
under the MVA which may also include compensation under the 
head of medical expenses, if claimed. These two stand on a different 
footing - one is statutory while the other is contractual and the latter 
is only a sequitur of premiums having been paid in the past while the 
other is an entitlement as a consequence of an accident or death in 
a motor vehicle accident. 
16.	 The matter is remanded to the High Court for making a determination 
consistent with this opinion. The appeal is dismissed as meritless. 
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
