[2026] 6 S.C.R. 521 : 2026 INSC 521
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors.
v.
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 6859 of 2014)
21 May 2026
[Ujjal Bhuyan and Vijay Bishnoi,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether there are sufficient grounds that warrant interference with 
the concurrent findings of the facts of all the Courts upholding 
validity of the Will.
Headnotes†
Will – Validity of Will – Exclusion of natural heirs – One BSN-
testator executed his last Will dated 15.05.1983 bequeathing all 
the plaint schedule properties in the favour of his only sister L, 
who is the plaintiff and respondent no. 1 herein, and cancelled 
the POA executed in favour of his brother-in-law – Testator 
passed away on 30.11.1983 – After the death of the testator, 
an application was made by his wife, being appellant no.1, 
before the Tehsildar, Udupi for the transfer of her husband’s 
properties in her favour – Mutation order was passed in favour 
of appellant no.1 – On 22.11.1990, L instituted a civil suit on 
the basis of the Will executed by the testator – The suit was 
filed seeking a declaration that the plaintiff is the absolute 
owner of the plaint schedule properties under the Will – The 
wife and children of the testator, namely appellant nos.1 
to 3 and respondent nos.2 to 4, filed a written statement and 
contended that the Will is false and fabricated – Trial Court 
allowed the suit of the plaintiff and declared plaintiff as owner 
of the plaint schedule property as per the Will – First Appellate 
Court affirmed the findings of the trial Court – Aggrieved, wife 
and children of the testator preferred a second appeal before 
the High Court, which was dismissed – Correctness:
Held: After a careful perusal of the relevant material on record and 
applying the settled proposition of law, it is evident that the Will was 
duly executed by the testator voluntarily out of his free will in a sound 
state of mind and the same stands proved through the testimony of 
one of the attesting witnesses, PW2 by the Trial Court – This witness 
* Author

522
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
categorically stated that the testator executed the Will in question in 
his presence, and that both he and the testator signed the Will in the 
presence of each other – Plaintiff had already given a representation 
before the Tehsildar, Udupi vide notice dated 10.02.1984 to mutate her 
name, and the said notice was received by the concerned authorities 
as evidenced by the postal certificate – As regards the contention 
of the appellants that they had obtained mutation entries in the year 
1984, it is well settled that such mutation entries do not confer title 
and it is effected merely for fiscal purposes, namely, to enable the 
State to realize tax from the person whose name is recorded in 
the revenue records – It is trite to state that when the validity of a 
Will is to be determined, the overall terms of a Will, the intention 
of the testator and the surrounding circumstances have also to be 
seen – Mere exclusion of the natural heirs from the property of the 
testator, by itself, cannot be construed as a suspicious circumstance 
so as to invalidate a Will outrightly – A testator is legally entitled to 
dispose of his property according to his own wishes, and unless the 
exclusion is accompanied by suspicious circumstances affecting the 
genuineness or due execution of a Will, such exclusion alone does 
not render a Will invalid – Thus, this Court is of the considered view 
that the exclusion of the natural heirs cannot be sufficient to vitiate 
the Will in question, particularly when the Will clearly specifies that 
the testator has not done any injustice to his wife, children, or other 
relatives, and that he has given enough to his wife and children who 
are residing at Bombay – The concurrent findings of all the Courts 
have rightly given a well-reasoned decision upholding the validity of 
the Will and the same does not warrant interference of this Court. 
[Paras 30, 31, 34, 39]
Case Law Cited
Indu Bala Bose & Ors. v. Manindra Chandra Bose & Anr. [1982] 
1 SCR 1188 : (1982) 1 SCC 20; Ishwardeo Narain Singh  v. 
Kamta Devi and Others (1953) 1 SCC 295; Meena Pradhan and 
Others v. Kamla Pradhan and Another, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 
1198 – relied on.
H. Venkatachala Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma and Others 
[1959] Supp. 1 SCR 426 : 1958 SCC OnLine SC 31; Bhagwan 
Kaur v. Kartar Kaur and Others (1994) 5 SCC 135; Janki Narayan 
Bhoir  v. Narayan Namdeo Kadam [2002] Supp. 5 SCR 175 : 
(2003) 2 SCC 91; Yumnam Ongbi Tampha Ibema Devi v. Yumnam 
Joykumar Singh and Others [2009] 4 SCR 157 : (2009) 4 SCC 780; 
Shivakumar and Others v. Sharanabasappa and Others [2020] 6 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
523
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors. v.  
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
SCR 666 : (2021) 11 SCC 277; Balwant Singh and Another v. Daulat 
Singh (Dead) By Lrs. and Others (1997) 7 SCC 137; Rabindra 
Nath Mukherjee and Another v. Panchanan Banerjee (Dead) by 
Lrs. and Others (1995) 4 SCC 459; Ram Piari v. Bhagwant and 
Ors. [1990] 1 SCR 813 : (1990) 3 SCC 364; G. Amalorpavam 
and Others v. R. C. Diocese of Madurai and Others [2006] 2 SCR 
899 : (2006) 3 SCC 224; Ayaaubkhan Noorkhan Pathan v. State 
of Maharashtra and Others [2012] 10 SCR 994 : (2013) 4 SCC 
465 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Civil Procedure,1908; Evidence Act, 1872.
List of Keywords
Will; Suspicious Circumstances; Exclusion of Natural Heirs; 
Attesting Witness; Forgery and Fraud; Concurrent Findings of Fact.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 6859 of 2014
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.11.2012 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in SA No. 1970 of 2012.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Sr. Adv., Shiv Vinayak Gupta, Ms. Anushka 
Rawal, Ms. Himani Singh, C. Tanay Chaube, Mrs. Bina Gupta.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Vinay Navare, Sr. Adv., Ms. Madhusmita Bora, Pawan Kishore 
Singh, Dipankar Singh, Ms. Pavithra V.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Vijay Bishnoi, J. 
1.	
The present appeal has been preferred by the Appellants challenging 
the Final Judgment and Order dated 15.11.2012 (hereinafter referred 
to as “Impugned Judgment”) passed by the High Court of Karnataka 

524
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
at Bangalore (hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”) in Regular 
Second Appeal No. 1970 of 2012, by which the High Court dismissed 
the appeal preferred by the Appellants herein and thereby affirmed 
the judgments and orders passed by the Trial Court as well as the 
First Appellate Court.
FACTUAL MATRIX
2.	
The brief facts are that one B. Sheena Nairi was a Permanent Resident 
of Bombay and was working as a Chartered Accountant at five big 
reputed companies. Besides owning a residential flat in Bombay, he 
owned substantial other immovable properties situated at Brahmavar 
and Chanthar Village, Udupi Taluk, Karnataka, consisting primarily 
of agricultural lands and ancestral properties.
3.	
B. Sheena Nairi had two sisters and two brothers, namely, Akkanni 
Nairi (elder sister), Laxmi Nairthy (younger sister), B. Jagannatha 
Nairi (elder brother), and B. Lakshmana Nairi (younger brother). B. 
Sheena Nairi had lost his elder sister, and after her demise, he took 
care of her two daughters and performed their marriages. 
4.	
B. Sheena Nairi was married to Parvathi Nairthi (Appellant No. 1), 
and they had five children, namely, Prabhakar Nairi (Appellant No. 2), 
Jayanth Nairi (Appellant No. 3), Leela Prabhu (Respondent No. 2), 
Sundara Nairi (Respondent No. 3), and Usha Nairi (Respondent 
No. 4) herein. For the management of certain properties, B. Sheena 
Nairi had executed a Power of Attorney (hereinafter referred to 
as “the POA”) in favour of his brother-in-law Krishnayya Nairi on 
30.04.1960 and 08.04.1961. 
5.	
B. Sheena Nairi executed his last Will dated 15.05.1983 (hereinafter 
referred to as “the Will”) bequeathing all the plaint schedule 
properties in the favour of his only sister Laxmi Nairthy, who is 
the Plaintiff and Respondent No. 1 herein, and cancelled the POA 
executed in favour of his brother-in-law. B. Sheena Nairi (hereinafter 
referred to as “the testator”) passed away on 30.11.1983, at the 
age of 69 years, due to heart attack in Delhi.
6.	
After the death of the testator, an application was made by his wife, 
being Appellant No. 1, before the Tehsildar, Udupi for the transfer of 
her husband’s properties in her favour. The Tehsildar, Udupi, vide 
order dated 01.02.1984, issued notice under the Karnataka Land 
Revenue Act, 1964 and called for the objections with respect to 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
525
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors. v.  
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
the said properties. Subsequently, the Tehsildar, Udupi, vide order 
dated 06.04.1984, passed mutation order transferring the properties 
in favour of Appellant No. 1. 
7.	
On 22.11.1990, Laxmi Nairthy, being the Plaintiff and Respondent 
No. 1, instituted a civil suit bearing O.S. No. 186 of 1990 before the 
Court of the Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Udupi (hereinafter 
referred to as the “Trial Court”) on the basis of the Will executed by 
the testator. The suit was filed seeking a declaration that the Plaintiff 
is the absolute owner of the plaint schedule properties under the 
Will; a decree of perpetual injunction restraining the wife and children 
of the testator from interfering with her peaceful possession of Item 
Nos. 1 to 3 of plaint schedule properties; recovery of possession of 
Schedule Item Nos. 4 to 12 of the plaint schedule properties, which 
had been given to Krishnayya Nairi under the Power of Attorney; 
mesne profits; and compensation till the delivery of possession.
8.	
The wife and children of the testator, namely Appellant Nos. 1 to 3 and 
Respondent Nos. 2 to 4, filed a written statement and contended that 
the Will is false and fabricated; that the testator has never executed 
any such Will; and that the signature affixed on the said Will does 
not belong to him. It was further contended that after the death of 
the testator, the said Will was created by his brothers, namely, B. 
Jagannatha Nairi and Lakshmana Nairi, in collusion with each other 
and that the plaint schedule properties were never in possession of 
the Plaintiff and the testator had never revoked the POA executed 
in favour of Krishnayya Nairi.
JUDGMENT OF THE TRIAL COURT
9.	
The Trial Court, vide Judgment and Decree dated 16.12.2008, 
allowed the suit of the Plaintiff and declared that the Plaintiff is the 
owner of the plaint schedule property as per the Will and ordered to 
handover the possession of Schedule Item Nos. 4 to 12 of the plaint 
schedule property to the Plaintiff and opened enquiry under Order 
XX Rule 12 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to 
as “CPC”) for mesne profits. The Trial Court held that:-
a.	
The Plaintiff produced her brother B. Jagannatha Nairi-PW2, who 
was one of the attesting witnesses to the Will. PW2 categorically 
deposed that the testator, being his brother, had executed the 
Will in his presence and that the signature appearing on the Will 

526
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
belonged to the testator. However, the wife and children of the 
testator, except filing the written statement, had not produced 
any witness and had not appeared for cross-examination in order 
to prove their allegations. On their behalf, only the POA holder 
appeared and had given his evidence which was doubtful. Also, 
the wife and the children had not specifically cross-examined 
the Plaintiff and B. Jagannatha Nairi-PW2 to prove the Will as 
fraudulent.
b.	
With regard to the dispute concerning signature of the testator 
on the Will, it was held that the signature in the POA executed 
by the testator was accepted by the wife and children of the 
testator and when that accepted signature was compared with 
the signatures appeared on every page of the Will, it appeared 
to be the same, observing sufficient coordination in the writing, 
the placement of dots in the signature and the formation of 
underline, thereby concluding that the signatures were made 
by the same person.
c.	
Further, it was also held that the testator, during his lifetime, 
executed the POA in respect to Schedule Item Nos. 4 to 12 
of the plaint schedule property in favour of Krishnayya Nairi 
through licence authority in 1961. However, the said POA was 
revoked after the death of the testator and Krishnayya Nairi had 
the possession of the said property as a licensee only. Except 
accepting the possession of the schedule property, Krishnayya 
Nairi had not denied the ownership of the property of the testator 
and had not prayed for any authority or ownership and so, the 
Plaintiff was entitled to recover the possession of Schedule 
Item Nos. 4 to 12 as per the Will.
d.	
However, it was observed that due to non-production of any 
reliable documents or any complaint lodged by the Plaintiff before 
the police regarding the alleged illegal interference of the wife 
and children of the testator, and in view of the fact that no eye 
witnesses were produced to prove the said incident, no case 
was made out for grant of a stay order in favour of the Plaintiff.
10.	 Aggrieved by the Judgment and Decree dated 16.12.2008, the wife 
and children of the testator preferred an appeal bearing R.A. No. 
4 of 2009 before the District & Sessions Judge at Udupi. However, 
the said appeal was transferred to the Fast Track Court, Udupi 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
527
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors. v.  
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
(hereinafter referred to as “the First Appellate Court”) for disposal 
in accordance with law.
JUDGMENT OF THE FIRST APPELLATE COURT
11.	 The First Appellate Court, vide Judgment and Decree dated 
06.08.2012, dismissed the appeal and affirmed the findings of the 
Trial Court. The First Appellate Court observed that the Plaintiff had 
already given her representation without any delay to the Tehsildar, 
Udupi on 10.02.1984 which disclosed all relevant facts including 
execution of the Will in her favour. Further, the wife and children of 
the testator, despite being the best persons to deny the plaint, had 
not stepped into the witness box to deny the contents of the plaint. 
Furthermore, the First Appellate Court relied upon the evidence of 
B. Jagannatha Nairi and inferred that the testator and the attesting 
witness had signed the Will in the presence of each other. Moreover, 
it was held that the Trial Court had rightly compared the disputed 
signature of the testator on the Will with the admitted signature on 
the POA, and since the Trial Court itself possesses such power, 
there was no necessity of a handwriting expert. Accordingly, the First 
Appellate Court concluded that no interference with the findings of 
the Trial Court was warranted. 
12.	 Aggrieved by the Judgment and Decree dated 06.08.2012, the wife 
and children of the testator preferred a second appeal bearing R.S.A 
No. 1970 of 2012 before the High Court of Karnataka.
IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
13.	 The High Court, vide Final Judgment and Order dated 15.11.2012, 
dismissed the second appeal. The High Court held that it was not 
the case of the Appellants that the First Appellate Court had failed 
to consider any particular ground or point urged by the Appellants. 
It was further observed that the First Appellate Court, in order to 
confirm the judgment of the Trial Court, had given detailed reasoning 
on each of the grounds canvassed in the appeal, though the points 
for consideration may not have been properly formulated. Therefore, 
the High Court held that merely on the technical grounds that the 
points formulated by the First Appellate Court were not in conformity 
with Order XLI Rule 31 of CPC, the findings of the First Appellate 
Court could not be set aside. With regard to the contention that the 

528
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
wife and the children of the testator had been excluded from the 
properties of the testator without any reason, the High Court held 
that the Will itself clearly recited that the testator had already given 
sufficient properties to his wife and children. However, for reasons 
best known to them, the wife and children of the testator did not 
enter the witness box and failed to furnish any particulars regarding 
the movable or immovable properties or cash allegedly given to 
them by the testator. Even the evidence of B. Jagannatha Nairi had 
not been seriously challenged by the Appellants and that it was not 
difficult for the Appellants to summon another attestor to the Will, 
if he had not attested the Will. Therefore, the High Court held that 
no substantial question of law arose for consideration in the appeal 
and accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.
14.	 Being aggrieved by the Impugned Judgment, the Appellants are 
before us. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANTS
15.	 Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf 
of the Appellants submitted that the suit was filed by the Plaintiff 
after 7 years of execution of the Will and 6 years after mutation 
and conversion of the land in favour of the Appellants, for which 
no explanation was given by the Plaintiff. Even no explanation was 
given as to why the testator would make a Will only for the lands 
and not for other assets, in favour of the Plaintiff, to the exclusion 
of his own wife and children.
16.	 Further, the learned Senior Counsel submitted that the Respondent 
No. 1 never objected to the mutation taking place in favour of the 
Appellants before the Tehsildar, Udupi in 1984 and no copy of the 
Will was produced at that time. No explanation was also given to 
the document filed by the Plaintiff showing practice of signatures of 
the testator.
17.	 Furthermore, the learned Senior Counsel also submitted that the 
testimony of B. Jagannatha Nairi, the attesting witness in the Will, 
stated the place of death of the testator to be Bombay and that he 
did not know about the contents of the Will.
18.	 Moreover, it is submitted that the Impugned Judgment categorically 
stated that the points of consideration framed by the First Appellate 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
529
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors. v.  
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
Court were “general” in nature and thereafter, erroneously arrived at 
the conclusion that all the Courts had scrutinised the entire evidence 
and facts on record, treating the same as “mere technicalities”. Thus, 
the First Appellate Court failed to comply with Order XLI Rule 31 
of CPC.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
19.	 Mr. Vinay Navare, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of 
the Respondents submitted that once specific allegations of forgery 
or fraud were made in respect of the Will and the Plaintiff had duly 
proved the execution of the Will, the burden shifted on the Appellants 
to prove their plea of forgery. However, the Appellants never asked 
for sending the Will for examination by a handwriting expert nor 
chose to examine any expert witness and thus, the specific plea of 
forgery was not even attempted to be proved.
20.	 The learned Senior Counsel also submitted that the proceedings 
throughout were initiated by Ganesha @ Ganapayya Nairi, namely 
Respondent No. 5, whereas the legal heirs of the testator, namely 
his wife and children, remained passive throughout the proceedings. 
This is evident from the fact that the written statement was signed, 
verified and affirmed solely by Respondent No. 5; only Respondent 
No. 5 was examined as DW1; and the application for stay before the 
First Appellate Court was verified and affirmed by Respondent No. 5 
alone. It is submitted that the same was for protecting his interest in 
the property as the testator had given possession of the property to the 
father of Respondent No. 5 as the POA holder and he was enjoying 
the possession. But the real beneficiaries of succession, namely the 
wife and children of the testator, did not enter the witness box either 
to prove the plea of forgery or to deny the execution of the Will.
21.	 Further, the learned Senior Counsel submitted that Mohammad 
Saheb, one of the attestors of the Will, filed an affidavit on 20.12.1990, 
which was even prior to the filing of the written statement by the 
Appellants on 18.02.1991. Therefore, the First Appellate Court rightly 
observed that, when the Trial Court had not issued any notice to him, 
the question arose as to how he came to know about the pendency 
of the suit and for what reason he had filed the said affidavit.
22.	 Furthermore, it is also submitted that, sometime after the death of 
the testator, the Plaintiff made an application dated 10.02.1984 to 

530
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the Tehsildar, Udupi requesting him to change the patta of the plaint 
schedule properties in her name in the mutation register. Copies of the 
said application were also forwarded to the Secretary, Bramhavara, 
Udupi Taluk, the Assistant Commissioner, Kundapura, and the 
Revenue Inspector, Bramhavara. However, the Plaintiff came to know 
that Krishnayya Nairi had managed to get the names of the wife and 
children of the testator entered in the records of rights in respect 
of the plaint properties without issuing any notice to the Plaintiff or 
conducting any enquiry. It is submitted that only in October, 1990, 
when Krishnayya Nairi along with his son, Ganesha @ Ganapayya 
Nairi, attempted to threaten the Plaintiff and cut the standing crops, 
the Plaintiff was constrained to file the suit. Therefore, there was no 
delay in producing the Will before the Trial Court.
23.	 Additionally, it is submitted that the testator, in the Will itself, specifically 
stated that “I am doing no injustice to my wife and children or other 
relatives…I have given enough and more to my wife and children 
who are residing at Bombay” and thus, the wife and children had 
already been provided with sufficient properties. 
24.	 Moreover, it is submitted that in the cross-examination of B. 
Jagannatha Nairi, being the only living attesting witness to the Will, 
he specifically stated that his brother’s daughter came to his house 
and took his signature on a paper, the contents of which were not 
informed to him and thus, the affidavit of B. Jagannatha Nairi relied 
upon by the Appellants is a self-created affidavit by the Appellants 
and thus, cannot be relied upon.
ANALYSIS
25.	 We have heard both the learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the parties and have perused the relevant material placed 
on record.
26.	 The issue that arises for our consideration is whether there are 
sufficient grounds that warrant interference with the concurrent 
findings of the facts of all the Courts upholding validity of the Will.
Principles for the Validity and Execution of a Will
27.	 Before adverting to the facts of the case, it is pertinent to refer to 
the relevant provisions governing the validity and execution of a 
Will. Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 reads as follow-

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
531
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors. v.  
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
“Section 68- Proof of Execution of document required 
by law to be attested­- If a document is required by law 
to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one 
attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose 
of proving its execution, if there be an attesting witness 
alive, and subject to the process of the Court and capable 
of giving evidence: xxx”
28.	 It has been categorically stated in the case of Meena Pradhan and 
Others v. Kamla Pradhan and Another1 that-
“9. A Will is an instrument of testamentary disposition of 
property. It is a legally acknowledged mode of bequeathing 
a testator’s property during his lifetime to be acted upon 
on his/her death and carries with it an element of sanctity. 
It speaks from the death of the testator. Since the testator/
testatrix, at the time of testing the document for its validity, 
would not be available for deposing as to the circumstances 
in which the will came to be executed, stringent requisites 
for the proof thereof have been statutorily enjoined to rule 
out the possibility of any manipulation.”
29.	 With regard to the principles pertaining to the validity and execution 
of a Will, reliance is placed on the judgments passed by 3 Judges 
Bench and 2 Judges Bench of this Court in H. Venkatachala 
Iyengar v. B.N. Thimmajamma And Others2, Bhagwan Kaur v. 
Kartar Kaur And Others3, Janki Narayan Bhoir v. Narayan 
Namdeo Kadam4, Yumnam Ongbi Tampha Ibema Devi v. 
Yumnam Joykumar Singh And Others5, and Shivakumar And 
Others v. Sharanabasappa And Others6, from which the following 
principles required for proving the validity and execution of a Will 
may be deduced:
“10.1. The court has to consider two aspects : firstly, that 
the will is executed by the testator, and secondly, that it 
was the last will executed by him;
1	
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1198.
2	
1958 SCC OnLine SC 31.
3	
(1994) 5 SCC 135.
4	
(2003) 2 SCC 91.
5	
(2009) 4 SCC 780.
6	
(2021) 11 SCC 277.

532
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
10.2. It is not required to be proved with mathematical 
accuracy, but the test of satisfaction of the prudent mind 
has to be applied.
10.3. A will is required to fulfil all the formalities required 
under Section 63 of the Succession Act, that is to say:
(a) The testator shall sign or affix his mark to the will or 
it shall be signed by some other person in his presence 
and by his direction and the said signature or affixation 
shall show that it was intended to give effect to the writing 
as a will;
(b) It is mandatory to get it attested by two or more 
witnesses, though no particular form of attestation is 
necessary;
(c) Each of the attesting witnesses must have seen the 
testator sign or affix his mark to the will or has seen some 
other person sign the will, in the presence and by the 
direction of the testator, or has received from the testator 
a personal acknowledgment of such signatures;
(d) Each of the attesting witnesses shall sign the will in 
the presence of the testator, however, the presence of all 
witnesses at the same time is not required;
10.4. For the purpose of proving the execution of the will, 
at least one of the attesting witnesses, who is alive, subject 
to the process of court, and capable of giving evidence, 
shall be examined;
10.5. The attesting witness should speak not only about 
the testator’s signatures but also that each of the witnesses 
had signed the will in the presence of the testator;
10.6. If one attesting witness can prove the execution of 
the will, the examination of other attesting witnesses can 
be dispensed with;
10.7. Where one attesting witness examined to prove 
the will fails to prove its due execution, then the other 
available attesting witness has to be called to supplement 
his evidence;

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
533
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors. v.  
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
10.8. Whenever there exists any suspicion as to the 
execution of the will, it is the responsibility of the propounder 
to remove all legitimate suspicions before it can be 
accepted as the testator’s last will. In such cases, the 
initial onus on the propounder becomes heavier.
10.9. The test of judicial conscience has been evolved for 
dealing with those cases where the execution of the will 
is surrounded by suspicious circumstances. It requires 
to consider factors such as awareness of the testator as 
to the content as well as the consequences, nature and 
effect of the dispositions in the will; sound, certain and 
disposing state of mind and memory of the testator at the 
time of execution; testator executed the will while acting 
on his own free will;
10.10. One who alleges fraud, fabrication, undue influence 
et cetera has to prove the same. However, even in the 
absence of such allegations, if there are circumstances 
giving rise to doubt, then it becomes the duty of the 
propounder to dispel such suspicious circumstances by 
giving a cogent and convincing explanation.
10.11. Suspicious circumstances must be “real, germane 
and valid” and not merely “the fantasy of the doubting mind 
[Shivakumar v. Sharanabasappa, (2021) 11 SCC 277] ”. 
Whether a particular feature would qualify as “suspicious” 
would depend on the facts and circumstances of each 
case. Any circumstance raising suspicion legitimate in 
nature would qualify as a suspicious circumstance, for 
example, a shaky signature, a feeble mind, an unfair and 
unjust disposition of property, the propounder himself taking 
a leading part in the making of the will under which he 
receives a substantial benefit, etc.”
30.	 Coming back to the present factual matrix, after a careful perusal of 
the relevant material on record and applying the settled proposition 
of law, it is evident that the Will was duly executed by the testator 
voluntarily out of his free will in a sound state of mind and the same 
stands proved through the testimony of one of the attesting witnesses, 
namely B. Jagannatha Nairi, who was examined as PW2 by the Trial 
Court. This witness categorically stated that the testator executed the 

534
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Will in question in his presence, and that both he and the testator 
signed the Will in the presence of each other.
Claim of Title Based on a Will
31.	 The contention of the Appellants that there was an unexplained 
delay of 7 years in producing the Will after the death of the testator 
is liable to be rejected. The said contention has been considered by 
all the Courts, which concurrently held that the Plaintiff had already 
given a representation before the Tehsildar, Udupi vide notice dated 
10.02.1984 to mutate her name, and the said notice was received 
by the concerned authorities as evidenced by the postal certificate. 
Although, there was no material which disclosed that the Plaintiff 
had produced the copy of the Will before the concerned authority, 
but the said notice itself disclosed all relevant facts, including the 
execution of the Will in favour of the Plaintiff, without any delay. All 
the Courts have duly examined the said issue thoroughly and have 
recorded concurrent findings and thus, we are also in conformity with 
the same. As regards the contention of the Appellants that they had 
obtained mutation entries in the year 1984, it is well settled that such 
mutation entries do not confer title and it is effected merely for fiscal 
purposes, namely, to enable the State to realize tax from the person 
whose name is recorded in the revenue records, as held in Balwant 
Singh And Another v. Daulat Singh (Dead) By LRs. And Others7. 
Also, the contention that the Will is unregistered has no significant 
bearing on its validity, as this Court in the case of Ishwardeo Narain 
Singh v. Kamta Devi And Others8 has clearly held that:-
“6. …There is nothing in law which requires the registration 
of a will and wills are in a majority of cases not registered 
at all. To draw any inference against the genuineness of 
the will on the ground of its non-registration appears to 
us to be wholly unwarranted.”
Scope of Suspicious Circumstances to Vitiate a Will
32.	 The contention of the Appellants that the Appellants, being the natural 
heirs of the testator, have been outrightly excluded without any 
7	
(1997) 7 SCC 137.
8	
(1953) 1 SCC 295.

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
535
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors. v.  
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
reason and that such exclusion constitutes a suspicious circumstance 
surrounding the execution of the Will is legally untenable. It is well-
established that mere deprivation of natural heirs, by itself, may not 
amount to a suspicious circumstance because the whole idea behind 
the execution of a Will is to interfere with the normal line of succession, 
as categorically held in Rabindra Nath Mukherjee and Another v. 
Panchanan Banerjee (Dead) by LRs and Others9. However, in the 
case of Ram Piari v. Bhagwant and Ors.10, this Court also held that 
prudence requires reason for denying the benefit of inheritance to 
natural heirs and an absence of it, though not invalidating the Will 
in all cases, shrouds the disposition with suspicious as it does not 
give inking to the mind of the testator to enable the Court to judge 
that disposition was a voluntary act. 
33.	 This brings us to the next issue i.e., what are the suspicious 
circumstances which may vitiate the disposition of a Will. In Indu 
Bala Bose & Ors. v. Manindra Chandra Bose & Anr.11, this Court 
held that-
“8. Needless to say that any and every circumstance is 
not a “suspicious” circumstance. A circumstance would 
be “suspicious” when it is not normal or is not normally 
expected in a normal situation or is not expected of a 
normal person.”
34.	 With regard to the prudence to be drawn while determining the 
suspicious circumstances, all the Courts have unambiguously opined 
that the Will in question was validly executed. It is trite to state that 
when the validity of a Will is to be determined, the overall terms of a 
Will, the intention of the testator and the surrounding circumstances 
have also to be seen. Mere exclusion of the natural heirs from the 
property of the testator, by itself, cannot be construed as a suspicious 
circumstance so as to invalidate a Will outrightly. A testator is legally 
entitled to dispose of his property according to his own wishes, and 
unless the exclusion is accompanied by suspicious circumstances 
affecting the genuineness or due execution of a Will, such exclusion 
alone does not render a Will invalid. Thus, we are of the considered 
9	
(1995) 4 SCC 459.
10	
(1990) 3 SCC 364.
11	
(1982) 1 SCC 20.

536
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
view that the exclusion of the natural heirs cannot be sufficient to 
vitiate the Will in question, particularly when the Will clearly specifies 
that the testator has not done any injustice to his wife, children, or 
other relatives, and that he has given enough to his wife and children 
who are residing at Bombay. 
Compliance of Order XLI Rule 31 of CPC
35.	 The contention of the Appellants that the First Appellate Court, while 
deciding the first appeal, has not complied with Order XLI Rule 31 
of CPC is hereby rejected. Rule 31 reads thus-
“Rule 31. Contents, date and signature of judgment- 
The judgment of the Appellate Court shall be in writing 
and shall state-
(a) the points for determination; 
(b) the decision thereon; 
(c) the reasons for the decision; and 
(d) where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, 
the relief to which the appellant is entitled, 
and shall at the time that it is pronounced be signed and 
dated by the Judge or by the Judges concurring therein.”
36.	 This Court in G. Amalorpavam And Others v. R. C. Diocese of 
Madurai and Others12 also held that:-
“9. The question whether in a particular case there has 
been substantial compliance with the provisions of Order 
41 Rule 31 CPC has to be determined on the nature of 
the judgment delivered in each case. Non-compliance 
with the provisions may not vitiate the judgment and 
make it wholly void, and may be ignored if there has been 
substantial compliance with it and the second appellate 
court is in a position to ascertain the findings of the lower 
appellate court. It is no doubt desirable that the appellate 
court should comply with all the requirements of Order 
41 Rule 31 CPC. But if it is possible to make out from 
12	
(2006) 3 SCC 224.

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
537
Parvathi Nairthi (Dead) and Ors. v.  
Laxmi Nairthy (Dead) Through Lrs. and Ors.
the judgment that there is substantial compliance with 
the said requirements and that justice has not thereby 
suffered, that would be sufficient. Where the appellate 
court has considered the entire evidence on record and 
discussed the same in detail, come to any conclusion and 
its findings are supported by reasons even though the 
point has not been framed by the appellate court there 
is substantial compliance with the provisions of Order 
41 Rule 31 CPC and the judgment is not in any manner 
vitiated by the absence of a point of determination. Where 
there is an honest endeavour on the part of the lower 
appellate court to consider the controversy between the 
parties and there is proper appraisement of the respective 
cases and weighing and balancing of the evidence, facts 
and the other considerations appearing on both sides is 
clearly manifest by the perusal of the judgment of the lower 
appellate court, it would be a valid judgment even though 
it does not contain the points for determination. The object 
of the rule in making it incumbent upon the appellate court 
to frame points for determination and to cite reasons for 
the decision is to focus attention of the court on the rival 
contentions which arise for determination and also to 
provide litigant parties opportunity in understanding the 
ground upon which the decision is founded with a view 
to enable them to know the basis of the decision and if 
so considered appropriate and so advised to avail the 
remedy of second appeal conferred by Section 100 CPC.”
37.	 In view of the above position of law, we are of the view that mere 
non-compliance with Order XLI Rule 31 of CPC may not vitiate 
the judgment and make it wholly void and may be ignored if there 
has been substantial compliance with it and the rule should not be 
interpreted technically to compromise substantial justice. The findings 
in the decision passed by the First Appellate Court have properly 
scrutinised the evidence on record, even if the points of consideration 
are general, and thus, the same does not suffer from any illegality. 
Evidentiary Value of Affidavits
38.	 The contention of the Appellants that the affidavits of both the 
attesting witnesses to the Will, denying that they had signed the same, 

538
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
render the Will invalid is unsustainable. In this regard, this Court 
in Ayaaubkhan Noorkhan Pathan v. State of Maharashtra and 
Others13 has categorically held that an affidavit is not an “evidence” 
within the meaning of Section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and 
the same can be used as “evidence” only if, for sufficient reasons, 
the Court passes an order under Order XIX of CPC and thus, the 
filing of an affidavit cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any 
Court or Tribunal, on the basis of which it can come to a conclusion 
as regards a particular fact situation. However, in a case where the 
deponent is available for cross-examination, and opportunity is given 
to the other side to cross-examine him, the same can be relied upon. 
In the present case, it is also important to note that those affidavits 
were filed even prior to the filing of the written statement, and the 
same has been rightly dealt by all the Courts, which questioned as 
to how the witnesses came to know about the enquiry regarding 
the validity of the Will despite no notice having been issued by the 
Court calling upon them to submit such affidavits. Thus, in view of 
the same, the affidavits filed by the attesting witnesses to the Will 
cannot be relied upon. 
CONCLUSION
39.	 Therefore, we are of the opinion that the concurrent findings of all 
the Courts have rightly given a well-reasoned decision upholding 
the validity of the Will and the same does not warrant interference 
of this Court.
40.	 For the aforesaid reasons, we affirm the Impugned Judgment and 
hence, the present appeal is dismissed.
41.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. No order as 
to costs.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
13	
(2013) 4 SCC 465.
