[2026] 6 S.C.R. 509 : 2026 INSC 520
Vice Chancellor, Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University
v.
Jitendra Singh & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 8054 of 2026)
21 May 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Alok Aradhe,* JJ]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the exercise of power by the Visitor-President 
of India, who appointed the First Registrar of the University, could 
grant approval for termination of the services the First Registrar.
Headnotes†
Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University Act, 2013 – s.46(b) – 
Transitional provisions – Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation 
University, First Statute, 2016 – Statute No.28(1) – Removal 
of employees of University – President of India, being the 
Visitor of the University approved the appointment of the 
First Registrar – First Registrar joined the services of the 
University  – During the period of probation, his services 
terminated – First Registrar filed writ petition seeking 
quashing of the termination order – Single Judge directed his 
reinstatement with all consequential benefits – Division Bench 
found the termination order to be stigmatic and remitted the 
matter to the University, to proceed afresh – First Registrar 
filed SLP which was dismissed – First Registrar reinstated in 
service and on the very same day placed under suspension 
in contemplation of disciplinary proceedings – Subsequently, 
Memorandum of Charges served upon him – Enquiry report 
that the charges against him stood proved – Enquiry report 
forwarded to the Secretary of Ministry of Civil Aviation who 
then submitted the proposal for approval of the Visitor, 
who accorded approval to the same – Thereafter, the order 
terminating the services of the First Registrar conveyed – Writ 
petition by First Registrar challenging the same, and during the 
pendency thereof, advertisement issued for filling up the post 
of Registrar of the University – First Registrar filed another 
writ petition seeking quashing of the fresh advertisement – 
* Author

510
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Single Judge held that the services of the First Registrar had 
never been extended beyond the initial period of probation 
of one year, thus, only entitled to one month’s notice prior to 
termination, and the appellants directed to pay one month’s 
salary to the First Registrar – Division Bench held that the 
entire action against the First Registrar had been undertaken 
by the officers of MOCA, which had no role to play under the 
Act or the Statutes, that the Visitor had no role in disciplinary 
proceedings concerning officers and employees of the 
University, thus, the entire action taken against the First 
Registrar was without jurisdiction, and quashed the order 
passed by the Single Judge, the order issued by the Deputy 
Secretary, MOCA, and the First Registrar was entitled to back 
wages/salary – Correctness:
Held: s.46(b) and Statute No.28(1) must, be read in the light of 
s.16 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, which provides that where, 
by any Central Act or Regulation, a power to make appointment is 
conferred, then, unless a different intention appears, the authority 
having power to make appointment shall also have power to 
suspend or dismiss any person so appointed in exercise of that 
power – Thus, the appointing authority necessarily possesses 
the power to terminate the services of the employee appointed 
by it  – Pursuant to the remand, an Enquiry Committee was 
constituted – Memorandum of Charges was served on the First 
Registrar and Enquiry Report was submitted – Visitor granted 
approval for termination of services of First Registrar, which was 
communicated to him – Tenure of the First Registrar u/s.46(b) 
was three years i.e., from 01.03.2019 till 28.02.2022 – Thus, in 
terms of Statute No.28(1), the services of the First Registrar were 
terminated by the Visitor who was also the appointing authority 
of the First Registrar – Action terminating services of the First 
Registrar appears to be in consonance with Statute No. 28(1) – 
Exercise of power by the Visitor appears to be just and proper – 
Thus the finding recorded by the Division Bench of the High 
Court that the Visitor had no role in the disciplinary proceedings 
against the First Registrar of University, cannot be concurred 
with – Having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of 
the case, namely, the expiry of period of appointment of the First 
Registrar and the repeated rounds of litigation between the parties, 
no inclination to interfere with the operative directions issued by 
the High Court. [Paras 25-29]

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
511
Vice Chancellor, Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University v.  
Jitendra Singh & Ors.
Case Law Cited
Britnell v. Secretary of State for Social Security [1991] 2 All ER 
726 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Thornton on Legislative Drafting 3rd ed.; (1987), p.319 – referred to.
List of Acts
Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University Act, 2013; Rajiv Gandhi 
National Aviation University, First Statute, 2016; General Clauses 
Act, 1897. 
List of Keywords
Exercise of power by Visitor-President of India; Appointment of 
the First Registrar of the University; Termination of the services of 
the First Registrar; Transitional provisions; Removal of employees 
of University; Memorandum of Charges; Enquiry report; Charges 
pertaining to indiscipline, gross insubordination, unprofessional 
conduct and obstruction of public servants in discharge of official 
duties; Secretary of Ministry of Civil Aviation; Approval of the 
Visitor-President of India.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
8054 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 22.05.2024 of the High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in SA No. 
236 of 2023.
With
Civil Appeal No. 8055 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Satya Darshi Sanjay, A.S.G., Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Sr. Adv., 
Sudarshan Lamba, Akshay Amritanshu, Shaurya R Rai, Satvika 
Thakur, Jagdish Chandra Solanki, Raghav Sharma, Ms. Anjana 
Gosain, Bhakti Vardhan Singh, Ms. Poornima Singh, Narendra 
Pandey, J. Tarun Kumar, Sauvik Singh, Ankit Khatri.

512
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
P.S. Patwalia, Anupam Lal Das, Sr. Advs., Kartikeya Singh, 
Ms. Akshita Nigam, Ms. Gayatri Gokula Krishnan, Kaushlendra 
Dutt Pandey, Anirudh Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Alok Aradhe, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
These appeals assail the order dated 22.05.2024 passed by the 
Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow 
Bench (“the High Court”), whereby the appeal preferred by respondent 
No.1 (hereinafter referred to as “the First Registrar”) was allowed and 
the order dated 25.04.2023, passed by the learned Single Judge, as 
well as the order dated 27.04.2022 passed by the Deputy Secretary, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India, were set aside.
FACTS 
3.	
The relevant facts giving rise to the filing of the present appeals are 
set out hereinbelow. 
4.	
The Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University Act, 2013 (“the 
Act”), was enacted to establish and incorporate a National Aviation 
University for facilitating and promoting aviation studies and achieving 
excellence in the fields of aviation management, policy, science and 
technology, inter alia. Pursuant thereto, the Rajiv Gandhi National 
Aviation University (“the University”) was established under the 
provisions of the Act. 
5.	
In exercise of the powers under Section 27(1) of the Act, the Central 
Government on 07.03.2016, framed the Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation 
University, First Statute, 2016 (“the Statutes”). The President of India, 
being the Visitor of the University, on 28.02.2019, conveyed approval for 
the appointment of the First Registrar. Thereafter, on 01.03.2019, the 
Vice Chancellor issued an offer of appointment to the First Registrar, 
appointing him on probation for a period of one year. On 08.04.2019, 
the First Registrar assumed charge as Registrar of the University.

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
513
Vice Chancellor, Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University v.  
Jitendra Singh & Ors.
6.	
During the period of probation, the services of the First Registrar 
were terminated by order dated 08/09.01.2020 and he was paid 
one month’s salary in lieu of notice. The First Registrar thereafter 
instituted two writ petitions challenging the order of termination, as 
well as the advertisement issued for filling up the post of Registrar. 
The aforesaid writ petitions were withdrawn on 13.01.2021 with 
liberty to file fresh petitions. 
7.	
Thereafter, the First Registrar filed a writ petition on 22.01.2021 
seeking quashing of the order of termination dated 08/09.01.2020 and 
the advertisement dated 04.05.2020 issued for filling up the post of 
Registrar. The learned Single Judge by an order dated 17.09.2021, 
directed the appellants to reinstate the First Registrar to the post of 
Registrar of the University with all consequential benefits, in terms 
of the appointment letter dated 01.03.2019. Accordingly, the writ 
petition was allowed. 
8.	
The appellants challenged the aforesaid order before the Division 
Bench. By an order dated 17.12.2021, the Division Bench, inter alia, 
held that the order terminating the services of the First Registrar 
during probation was ex facie stigmatic and the matter was remitted 
to the University to proceed afresh in accordance with law and to 
pass an appropriate order within a period of two months. It was 
further directed that the entitlement of the First Registrar to back 
wages would abide by the outcome of the further action to be taken 
by the University. The order dated 17.09.2021, passed by the learned 
Single Judge, was modified to the aforesaid extent and the appeal 
was partly allowed. 
9.	
The First Registrar challenged the order dated 17.12.2021 before 
this Court, by filing a Special Leave Petition, which came to be 
dismissed on 04.02.2022, with liberty to the First Registrar to raise 
all pleas and contentions before the competent authority by way of 
representation. 
10.	 On 31.12.2021, the First Registrar was reinstated in service. On the 
very same day, he was placed under suspension in contemplation 
of disciplinary proceedings. Subsequently, on 22.02.2022, a 
Memorandum of Charges was served upon him. 
11.	 An Enquiry Committee comprising three members was constituted 
on 25.02.2022, which submitted its Report on 23.03.2022. In 
the enquiry report, the charges pertaining to indiscipline, gross 

514
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
insubordination, unprofessional conduct and obstruction of public 
servants in discharge of official duties were held to be proved. On 
29.03.2022, the enquiry report was forwarded to the Secretary of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation (“MOCA”), who in turn submitted the proposal 
for approval of the Visitor, who accorded the approval to the same 
on 20.04.2022. Thereafter, by communication dated 27.04.2022, 
the Deputy Secretary, MOCA conveyed the order terminating the 
services of the First Registrar.
12.	 The First Registrar challenged the aforesaid order of termination 
before the High Court by filing a writ petition. During the pendency 
of the said writ petition, an advertisement was issued for filling 
up the post of Registrar of the University. Consequently, the First 
Registrar instituted another writ petition seeking quashing of the 
fresh advertisement. 
13.	 The learned Single Judge, by an order dated 25.04.2023, inter alia, 
held that the services of the First Registrar had never been extended 
beyond the initial period of probation of one year and, therefore, 
he was only entitled to one month’s notice prior to termination. 
Accordingly, the writ petition was disposed of with a direction to the 
appellants to pay one month’s salary to the First Registrar. 
14.	 Aggrieved thereby, the First Registrar preferred an intra-court appeal. 
The Division Bench of the High Court, by the impugned order dated 
22.05.2024, observed that the entire action against the First Registrar 
had been undertaken by the officers of MOCA, which had no role 
to play under the Act or the Statutes. It was held that the Visitor 
had no role in disciplinary proceedings concerning officers and 
employees of the University. Consequently, the Division Bench held 
that the entire action taken against the First Registrar was without 
jurisdiction. Accordingly, the order dated 25.04.2023 passed by the 
learned Single Judge, as well as the order dated 27.04.2022 issued 
by the Deputy Secretary, MOCA, were quashed. The First Registrar 
was also held entitled to back wages/salary up to 07.04.2022 and 
the appeal was allowed. Being aggrieved, the University as well as 
the Union of India have preferred these appeals.
SUBMISSIONS 
15.	 Learned senior counsel appearing for the University, submitted that 
the High Court erred in holding that while the appointment of the 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
515
Vice Chancellor, Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University v.  
Jitendra Singh & Ors.
First Registrar was made by the University, the disciplinary action 
could not be undertaken by the Visitor. It was contended that the First 
Registrar was admittedly the “First Registrar” of the University and, 
therefore, his appointment was governed by the transitional provisions 
contained in Section 46 of the Act. It was further submitted that the 
Hon’ble President of India, being the Visitor of the University, had 
conveyed approval for the appointment of the First Registrar and, 
therefore, disciplinary action was rightly taken with the approval of 
the Visitor.
16.	 It was urged that Clause 7 of the Statutes applies only to regular 
appointments made by the University and not to the appointment 
of the First Registrar. It is submitted that the High Court failed 
to take note of Section 46 of the Act and erroneously concluded 
that the Visitor lacked jurisdiction to take action against the First 
Registrar. 
17.	 It was contended that, pursuant to the liberty granted by the Division 
Bench of the High Court, which was upheld by this Court, the earlier 
order of termination had been revisited and a fresh order had 
thereafter been passed in accordance with law. It was argued that 
the High Court erred in granting back wages to the First Registrar 
in the absence of any specific challenge to the order denying the 
same. It was, therefore, submitted that the impugned order deserved 
to be set aside.
18.	 Learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India, 
while adopting the submissions advanced on behalf of the University, 
submitted that the Executive Council of the University was constituted 
on 07.03.2016 and held its first meeting on 19.12.2017. Inviting our 
attention to the proviso to Section 20(1) of the Act, it was submitted 
that until the constitution of the first Executive Council, the Steering 
Committee of MOCA was required to function as the interim Executive 
Council. It was, therefore, contended that the Visitor was competent 
to take action against the First Registrar. 
19.	 Per contra, learned senior counsel appearing for the First Registrar 
submitted that the Visitor is empowered to appoint the Vice Chancellor 
but cannot exercise disciplinary authority on the recommendation 
of MOCA, which has no statutory role in disciplinary proceedings 
concerning employees of the University. It was argued that the First 
Registrar was an employee of the University and not of MOCA 

516
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and, therefore, no disciplinary action could have been initiated or 
undertaken by MOCA. It was accordingly urged that the appeals 
deserved to be dismissed.
ANALYSIS
20.	 We have considered the rival submissions advanced on behalf of 
the parties and have perused the record. From perusal of Section 
2(b), (l) and (x), Section 9(1), 9(2) to 9(12), Section 12, Section 14 
and Section 20 of the Act, the following conclusions can be deduced: 
(i)	
“academic staff” means such categories of staff as are 
designated as academic staff by the Ordinances. [Section 2(b)]
(ii)	
‘employee’ means any person appointed by the University 
and includes the teachers and other staff of the University. 
[(Section 2(l)]
(iii)	 Teachers of the University means Professors, Associate 
Professors, Assistant Professors, Readers, Senior Lecturers, 
Lecturers and such other persons as may be appointed or 
recognised for imparting instruction or conducting research in 
the University or in any college or institution maintained by the 
University. [Section 2(x)]
(iv)	 The President of India is the Visitor of the University and has 
the powers enumerated in Section 9(2) to Section 9(12) of the 
Act. [Section 9]
(v)	
The Registrar has to be appointed by the Executive Council 
and has such powers and duties which may be prescribed by 
the Statutes. [Section 14]
(vi)	 The Executive Council is the principal Executive Body of the 
University and till the First Executive Council is formed, the 
Steering Committee of MOCA shall function as an interim 
Executive Council. (Section 20)
21.	 Section 46 of the Act contains transitional provisions. The relevant 
extract of Section 46 reads as under: -
“46. Transitional provisions.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the 
Statutes,—

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
517
Vice Chancellor, Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University v.  
Jitendra Singh & Ors.
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice-Chancellor 
shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner 
and on such conditions as may be deemed fit and 
each of the said officers shall hold office for such 
term, not exceeding five years, as may be specified 
by the Visitor; 
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall 
be appointed by the Visitor on the recommendation 
of the Vice-Chancellor and each of the said officers 
shall hold office for a term of three years.”
22.	 Statute No. 28 deals with the removal of employees of the University. 
The relevant extract of Statute No.28 is extracted below: -
“28. Removal of employees of University.—
(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a 
teacher, a member of the academic staff or other employee 
of the University, the Vice-Chancellor, in the case of the 
teacher or member of the academic staff, and the authority 
competent to appoint (here after in this Statute referred to 
as the appointing authority) in the case of other employee, 
may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of 
the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, 
under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive 
Council the circumstances in which the order was made:
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the 
opinion, that the circumstances of the case do not warrant 
the suspension of the teacher or the member of the 
academic staff, revoke such order.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of 
the contract of appointment or of any other terms and 
conditions of service of the employees, the Executive 
Council in respect of teachers and other academic staff, 
and the appointing authority, in respect of other employees, 
shall have the power to remove a teacher or a member 
of the academic staff or other employee, as the case may 
be, on grounds of misconduct.
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the 
case may be the appointing authority, shall not be entitled 

518
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or 
other employee except for a good cause and after giving 
three months’ notice or on payment of three months’ salary 
in lieu thereof.
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other 
employee shall be removed under clause (2) or clause 
(3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of 
showing cause against the action proposed to be taken 
in regard to him.”
Thus, where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, 
a member of the academic staff, or other employee of the University, 
the Vice-Chancellor, in the case of teacher and member of the 
academic staff, and the appointing authority in the case of other 
employee, may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of 
the academic staff or other employee, as the case may be, under 
suspension and shall have the power to remove on the ground of 
misconduct. 
23.	 The necessity for transitional provision may arise either due to 
change in law, whether the change in law is caused by new law, 
or by repeal and substitution or modification of law. Section 46 of 
the Act is, undoubtedly, a transitional provision. The function of a 
transitional provision is to make special provision for the application 
of legislation to the circumstances which exist at the time when the 
legislation comes into force1. One feature of a transitional provision 
is that its operation is expected to be temporary, in that it becomes 
spent when all the past circumstances with which it is designed to 
deal have been dealt with, while the primary legislation continues 
to deal indefinitely with the new circumstances which arise after its 
passage2. The power under Section 46(b) of the Act, exhausts itself 
when it is exercised by making an appointment. 
24.	 Statute No.28(1) provides that power of removal of a teacher, a 
member of academic staff or other employee of the University, the 
Vice-Chancellor, on the ground of misconduct, is conferred upon the 
appointing authority. The appointing authority for the post of Registrar 
1	
Thornton on Legislative Drafting 3rd ed.; (1987), p.319 
﻿2 
Britnell v. Secretary of State for Social Security; [1991] 2 All ER 726 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
519
Vice Chancellor, Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University v.  
Jitendra Singh & Ors.
is the Executive Council, which has power to take an action for 
removal of the Registrar on the ground of misconduct.
25.	 However, the present case stands on a distinct footing, as, we are 
concerned with the First Registrar and not the Regular Registrar. 
Section 46(b) and Statute No.28(1) must, therefore, be read in the 
light of Section 16 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, which provides 
that where, by any Central Act or Regulation, a power to make 
appointment is conferred, then, unless a different intention appears, 
the authority having power to make appointment shall also have 
power to suspend or dismiss any person so appointed in exercise 
of that power. Thus, the appointing authority necessarily possesses 
the power to terminate the services of the employee appointed by it.
26.	 In the instant case, the First Registrar was appointed on 01.03.2019 
and joined the services of the University on 08.04.2019. During 
the period of probation, by an order dated 08/09.01.2020, his 
services were terminated. The First Registrar challenged the order 
of termination in a writ petition. By an order dated 17.09.2021, the 
learned Single Judge directed the appellants to reinstate the First 
Registrar to the Post of Registrar with all consequential benefits 
in terms of appointment letter 01.03.2019. Thereafter, the Division 
Bench of the High Court by an order dated 17.12.2021 found the 
order of termination to be stigmatic and remitted the matter to the 
University, to proceed afresh. The aforesaid order of the Division 
Bench has attained finality as Special Leave Petition preferred by the 
First Registrar was dismissed. It is noteworthy that in the aforesaid 
round of litigation, the First Registrar did not take the plea that Visitor 
lacked authority to terminate his services. 
27.	 Pursuant to the remand, an Enquiry Committee was constituted. A 
Memorandum of Charges dated 22.02.2022 was served on the First 
Registrar and an Enquiry Report was submitted on 29.03.2022. The 
Visitor granted approval for termination of services of First Registrar 
on 20.04.2022, which was communicated to him on 27.04.2022. 
The tenure of the First Registrar under Section 46(b) of the Act 
was three years i.e., from 01.03.2019 till 28.02.2022. Therefore, in 
terms of Statute No.28(1), the services of the First Registrar were 
terminated by the Visitor who was also the appointing authority of the 
First Registrar. The action terminating services of the First Registrar 
appears to be in consonance with Statute No. 28(1).

520
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
CONCLUSION
28.	 In the facts and circumstances of the present case, the exercise of 
power by the Visitor appears to be just and proper. We are, therefore, 
unable to concur with the finding recorded by the Division Bench of 
the High Court in its judgment dated 22.05.2024 that the Visitor had 
no role in the disciplinary proceedings against the First Registrar of 
University. 
29.	 However, having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of 
the case, namely, the expiry of period of appointment of the First 
Registrar and the repeated rounds of litigation between the parties, 
we are not inclined to interfere with the operative directions issued 
by the High Court. 
30.	 Accordingly, the appeals are disposed of in the aforesaid terms. 
There shall be no order as to costs. 
Result of the case: Appeals disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
