[2026] 6 S.C.R. 592 : 2026 INSC 528
Papan Sarkar @ Pranab
v.
State of West Bengal
(Criminal Appeal No. 2507 of 2026)
22 May 2026
[Sanjay Kumar and K. Vinod Chandran,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the order of conviction by the Trial Court, affirmed by the 
High Court, based on the circumstances of the last seen together 
theory, extra-judicial confession, recovery of the objects used as 
weapons and a motorbike, seizures from the place of occurrence, 
oral testimonies and the serological report, ought to be reversed.
Headnotes†
Circumstantial Evidence – Complete chain of circumstances, 
when not established – Trial court found from the last seen 
together theory, extra-judicial confession, recovery of the 
objects used as weapons and a motorbike, the seizures 
carried out and the serology report, that a complete chain 
of circumstances was established to convict the accused 
persons with the crime of premeditated murder – Conviction 
confirmed by High Court – Interference with:
Held: What assumes significance in placing reliance on the last seen 
together theory is the gap between the time the accused and the 
deceased were seen together and the death having occurred – The 
proximity of the death having occurred within a short time after the 
accused and the deceased were seen together is most relevant, 
for the said fact to be taken as an incriminating circumstance 
against the accused – When the time gap is large then there could 
be intervening circumstances, which snaps the link and prevents 
an adverse inference against the accused merely for the reason 
that the accused does not put forth an explanation as to when he 
parted company with the deceased – In the present case, the time 
frame being quite large to term death as proximate, there can be 
no conviction based on the last seen together theory – Further, 
the exculpatory statement made by an accused absolving himself 
* Author

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
593
Papan Sarkar @ Pranab v. State of West Bengal
and accusing the co-accused, by its very nature is unreliable – It 
cannot be put against the other accused, for no cross examination 
being provided to them, of the one who made that statement – It 
cannot also incriminate the person who made the statement since 
there is no element of confession in the recital as spoken of by 
three witnesses, as against one – Extra-judicial confession by its 
very nature being a weak piece of evidence has not at all been 
proved in the present case – In any event, the statement is made 
when the two accused were detained by a mob, on the accusation 
of murder – Obviously, there is considerable pressure put on the 
detained persons, who could have spoken, on undue duress or 
under threat of violence – In fact, the records indicate that after 
arrest, when A1&2 were taken for medical examination, they had 
injuries on their body, which again cuts at the root of credibility 
of the statement made; which anyway has doubtful standing as 
a confession – Also, the recoveries are of no avail and do not 
form a clinching incriminating circumstance against the accused – 
Furthermore, the absence of motive, especially when the murder 
was brutal, is yet another aspect raising a reasonable doubt – In 
the totality of the circumstances, each having been examined, 
none of those projected having qualified as incriminating, links the 
accused to the murder – Order of conviction by the Trial Court and 
affirmed by the High Court, reversed. [Paras 6, 7, 10, 11, 17, 18]
Circumstantial Evidence – Evidence Act, 1872 – s.27 – 
Recoveries made, when do not qualify to be one u/s.27  – 
Recoveries, when do not form clinching incriminating 
circumstance – Recoveries made allegedly with the aid of the 
accused- the dead body was found in a field, an open space 
with free access to anybody; stone and glass piece are said 
to have been recovered from the place of occurrence itself, 
albeit with the aid of the accused:
Held: There are serious doubts about the recoveries having the 
status of a recovery u/s.27, Evidence Act, but it is assumed to be 
so – A stone, weighing 1-1.5 kg and a glass piece were said to 
have been recovered, on the showing of the accused, specifically 
A1 and A2 – The seizure list as seen from the records does not 
indicate the specific place from which it was recovered other than 
stating that it is ‘from the PO at the paddy land of JR’ – The State 

594
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
argued that though the paddy field had free access, it was thick 
with stalks and there could definitely be a concealment; the growth 
not borne out from the evidence – Though, it is not doubted that 
there could be concealment even in a public place or in a field 
with thick vegetation, but there is no statement recorded from 
the accused as to such a concealment having been effected and 
then the police having been led to the location and the material 
object recovered from the place of concealment – Recital in the 
seizure list is only that ‘on being shown and certified by accused 
1 and 2’ – Concealment and its knowledge, revealed from the 
statement of the accused, is the crucial ingredient of s.27 which 
can lead to that being used in a criminal trial, any other confession 
to a police officer being excluded as self-incriminating – Moreover, 
recovery has no clarity and more importantly the accused pointing 
out the concealed objects or even their presence at the time was 
not deposed to by PW5 – There was no statement taken of the 
accused of a concealment and the recoveries made do not qualify 
to be one u/s.27 – The stains on the stone found at the place of 
occurrence and the serology report of it being human blood, hence, 
is of no consequence – More pertinently, the alleged weapons of 
assault were not shown to the Doctor to elicit his opinion as to 
whether the said objects could have caused the injuries found on 
the dead body – The recoveries are of no avail and do not form 
a clinching incriminating circumstance against the accused  – 
The discrepancy noticed insofar as the recovery of the alleged 
weapons of assault, equally applies in the case of the seizure of 
the motorcycle also – Also, the motorcycle though handed over 
to PW1 on challan, the same was not produced before Court nor 
was its registration details proffered to indicate that it belongs to 
the deceased or PW1, as is the version of PW1 – PW1 was also 
not asked about the recovery of the motorcycle and handing over 
by the police. [Paras 12, 14-16]
Case Law Cited
State of Goa v. Sanjay Thakran and Another [2007] 3 SCR 507 : 
(2007) 3 SCC 755 – relied on.
List of Acts
Evidence Act, 1872.

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
595
Papan Sarkar @ Pranab v. State of West Bengal
List of Keywords
Murder; Complete chain of circumstances not established; No 
incriminating circumstance; Premeditated murder; Brutal murder; 
Absence of motive; Reasonable doubt; Testimony does not inspire 
confidence; Accused not linked to the murder; Last seen together 
theory; No conviction on last seen together theory; Conviction 
cannot be based on last seen together theory; Large time gap; 
Time gap is large; Gap between the time the accused and the 
deceased were seen together; Intervening circumstances; Extra-
judicial confession; Extra-judicial confession not proved; Weak 
piece of evidence; Recoveries of no avail; Recoveries do not form 
clinching incriminating circumstance; Discrepancy in recovery of 
alleged weapons of assault; Discrepancy in seizure of motorcycle; 
Recovery of motorcycle; Alleged weapons of assault; Recovery 
of objects; Seizures from place of occurrence; Serology report; 
Serological report; Human blood; Proximity of death; Incriminating 
circumstance; Postmortem report; Exculpatory statement unreliable; 
Accused absolving himself and accusing the co-accused; Accused 
detained by a mob; Statement made under undue duress; Pressure 
on the detained persons; Threat of violence; Concealment in a public 
place; Concealment in a field with thick vegetation; Concealment 
and its knowledge; Stains on the stone found; Absence of motive; 
Blood stains on the stone; Large time frame; Death not proximate; 
Order of conviction reversed.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
2507 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.09.2025 of the High Court 
at Calcutta in CRA No. 8 of 2016.
With
Criminal Appeal No. 2508 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Ashima Mandla, Ms. Mandakini Singh, Ayush Shrivastava.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Shraddha Chirania, Kunal Mimani.

596
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
The son of the de-facto complainant found missing from the evening of 
31.10.2012, turned up dead on the next day in a field, head down with 
the legs sticking up from a ditch. His three companions of the previous 
day found drinking and roaming around were rounded up and arrayed 
as accused. The prosecution went to trial with the circumstances 
of the last seen together theory, extra-judicial confession, recovery 
of the objects used as weapons & a motorbike, seizures from the 
place of occurrence, oral testimonies and the serological report. 
The trial court convicted the accused and sentenced them, which 
was confirmed by the High Court. Two out of the three accused 
are before us in appeal i.e. the first and second accused, the third 
having not filed an appeal. 
2.	
We have heard Ms. Ashima Mandla, learned Counsel appearing for 
the appellant and Ms. Shraddha Chirania, learned Counsel appearing 
for the respondent who also filed written notes of submissions.
3.	
Before the trial court, sixteen witnesses were examined and 40 
exhibits were marked, which included documents. The trial court 
found from the last seen together theory, extra-judicial confession; 
both spoken of by more than one witness, testimony of PW-4 who 
spoke of A3 having come to her house on the very same night, the 
recovery of the objects used as weapons, the seizures carried out 
and the serology report, that a complete chain of circumstances 
was established to nail the accused with the crime of premeditated 
murder. The multiple depositions regarding the last seen together 
theory and the extra-judicial confessions corroborated each other. 
So did the extra-judicial confession of the murder having been 
committed in a field, corroborated by the recovery of the body from 
the field and the detection of alcohol in the stomach, corroborated 
the testimony of the deceased having been found drinking with the 
accused. The High Court too listed out the above circumstances to 
convict the accused.
4.	
We have to examine each of the circumstances as pointed out by 
the trial court and affirmed by the High Court. In the present appeal, 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
597
Papan Sarkar @ Pranab v. State of West Bengal
PW1 is the de-facto complainant, the father of the deceased. The FIS 
was taken down as recited by PW1, by PW2. It was the testimony of 
PW1 that on the evening of 30.10.2012 at around 4 PM, the three 
accused came on a motorbike and his son accompanied them on 
another motorbike, belonging to PW1. When his son did not reach 
home by 8 o’Clock, he searched for him along with PW3 and PW8. 
He also spoke of PW4, the aunt of A3 having spoken of A3 having 
approached her on the same night. On the next day morning, he 
heard about the death of his son and the detention of A1 and A2 
by villagers. The last seen together theory commences from PW1’s 
testimony, of his son having gone with the three accused at about 4 
PM and is taken forward, by the prosecution, through PW3, PW11 
and PW14.
5.	
PW3 spoke of having seen the accused together with the deceased 
roaming at around 10 AM and at 5 PM, in his presence, PW1 
having enquired about the deceased with his elder son. He spoke 
of having searched for the son of PW1 at the house of A1 and A3. 
A1 was not in his house and A3 is said to have gone with a truck. 
PW3 also spoke of A3 having come back at night with his father to 
enquire about the whereabouts of the deceased with PW1. The said 
statement is in contrast with the testimony of PW14 that A3 along 
with his father and another person came to PW1 on the same night 
and threatened him; not stated by PW1 itself. PW14 also spoke of 
having seen the accused and the deceased roaming around at 5 PM. 
PW3’s testimony that he had seen the deceased with the accused 
at 10 AM is of no use since PW1 admits that his son was at home 
after that and he accompanied the accused only at 4 PM, after which 
PW14 had seen him at 5 PM, the dead body having been recovered 
on the next day morning.
6.	
One other crucial witness projected by the prosecution is PW11 who 
testified that she saw the four men drinking in the field behind the 
BDO office, on the evening of 30.10.2012 when she was returning 
from work. The trial court and the High Court laid emphasis on 
this testimony especially since the post mortem report indicated 
alcohol in the stomach of the deceased, which was held to have 
corroborated the testimony of PW11. However, a close reading of 
the cross-examination of PW11 raises grave suspicion about her 
testimony. She admitted in her cross-examination that the BDO office 
was open till evening and that the locality was thickly populated; 

598
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
reducing the chances of a drinking spree in public. The justification 
for her presence in the locality was that she was returning from work, 
but, she was unable to point out or specify the house in which she 
worked, the name of her employer or even the locality in which the 
house was situated. We cannot but opine that PW11’s testimony 
does not inspire enough confidence to make it an incriminating 
circumstance to find the accused guilty of the offence alleged on the 
strength of the accused and the deceased having been seen together 
in the evening of 30.10.2012, that too drinking, in the field behind 
the BDO office. One other witness, PW13, put forth to speak on the 
four persons having come to the hotel in which he was employed 
at 6 pm, turned hostile.
7.	
Be that as it may, we have the evidence of PW1 and PW14, the 
first of whom spoke of the accused having taken the deceased 
from his house at 4 PM and PW14 having testified that the four 
persons together were seen roaming at around 5 PM. What assumes 
significance in placing reliance on the last seen together theory is 
the gap between the time they were seen together and the death 
having occurred. The proximity of the death having occurred within 
a short time after the accused and the deceased were seen together 
is most relevant, for the said fact to be taken as an incriminating 
circumstance against the accused. When the time gap is large then 
there could be intervening circumstances, which snaps the link and 
prevents an adverse inference against the accused merely for the 
reason that the accused does not put forth an explanation as to 
when he parted company with the deceased (State of Goa v. Sanjay 
Thakran and Another1). 
8.	
Immediately, we have to examine the postmortem report, which 
notices the time of autopsy as 31.10.2012 at 2.10 PM, the inquest 
having been at 10.15 AM, which report was proved in trial by the 
Doctor examined as PW10. The postmortem report indicates the 
loss of left eye with massive lacerations around both the left and 
right eyes, sharp cut injuries and massive lacerations on the face 
and even on the occipital bone on the posterior aspect of the skull 
as also burning of the right side of the face along with the right 
shoulder. No doubt the death was delivered in a brutal manner, and 
﻿1 
(2007) 3 SCC 755

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
599
Papan Sarkar @ Pranab v. State of West Bengal
the Doctor speaks of death having been caused due to the shock by 
reason of the wounds sustained and the resultant hemorrhage. The 
Doctor does not speak of any single injury having led to the death. 
9.	
What is pertinent in considering the circumstance of last seen 
together is that the postmortem report indicates the time of death as 
‘24 hours not passed during examination after death of deceased’. 
The time provided is very elastic and since PW14 stated that he 
saw the deceased along with the accused at 5 PM on the previous 
day, death could have happened at any time in the intervening night 
or in the morning, before the body was recovered at around 10 AM 
on 31.10.2012. The time frame being quite large to term death as 
proximate, there can be no conviction based on the last seen together 
theory in the present case. We have to hence, necessarily look at the 
other circumstances, which together, if found incriminating enough, 
the last seen together theory also would offer a link, though a weak 
one, in the chain of circumstances.
10.	 The next circumstance projected by the prosecution is the extra-
judicial confession as spoken of by PW3, PW8, PW12 and PW14. 
As per their testimony, when PW1’s son did not return even on the 
next day, there was a massive search carried out, and the villagers 
had detained A1 and A2. It is the testimony of PW8 that he assured 
A1 that the mob would not assault him upon which A1 confided 
to him that the three accused together murdered PW1’s son. The 
testimony was that A1 told PW8 that, at first A3 hit the deceased and 
thereafter he insisted that A1 and A2 assault him and thus together 
they killed the deceased. It is pertinent that in cross-examination 
PW8 specifically stated that while A1 made the confession PW3 
was present with him. PW3 on the other hand speaks not of a 
confession but an exculpatory statement made by A1 that it was 
A2 and A3 who killed the deceased. PW12 and PW14, two other 
witnesses who spoke of the extra-judicial confession also spoke in 
tandem with what PW3 stated. The exculpatory statement made 
absolving himself and accusing the co-accused, by its very nature 
is unreliable. It cannot be put against the other accused, for no 
cross examination being provided to them, of the one who made 
that statement. It cannot also incriminate the person who made the 
statement since there is no element of confession in the recital as 
spoken of by three witnesses, as against one. 

600
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
11.	 It is also of relevant import that PW8 specifically spoke of a mob 
having detained A1 and A2 and PW8 having taken A1 aside to speak 
to him, when he made the confession in the presence of PW3; thus 
again raising a suspicion of whether PW12 and PW14 were privy to 
the statement made by A1. The extra-judicial confession by its very 
nature being a weak piece of evidence has not at all been proved 
in the present case. In any event, the statement is made when the 
two accused were detained by a mob, on the accusation of murder. 
Obviously, there is considerable pressure put on the detained persons, 
who could have spoken, on undue duress or under threat of violence. 
In fact, the records indicate that after arrest, when A1&2 were taken 
for medical examination, they had injuries on their body, which again 
cuts at the root of credibility of the statement made; which anyway 
has doubtful standing as a confession.
12.	 Now we come to the recoveries made allegedly with the aid of the 
accused. The dead body was found in a field, an open space with 
free access to anybody. The stone and glass piece are said to have 
been recovered from the place of occurrence itself, albeit with the aid 
of the accused. We have serious doubts about the recoveries having 
the status of a recovery under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
but for the time being we would assume it to be so. A stone, weighing 
1-1.5 kg and a glass piece were said to have been recovered, on 
the showing of the accused, specifically A1 and A2. The seizure list 
as seen from the records does not indicate the specific place from 
which it was recovered other than stating that it is ‘from the PO at 
the paddy land of Jogesh Roy’. The learned State Counsel would 
argue that though the paddy field had free access, it was thick with 
stalks and there could definitely be a concealment; the growth not 
borne out from the evidence. We do not for a moment doubt that 
there could be concealment even in a public place or in a field with 
thick vegetation, but there is no statement recorded from the accused 
as to such a concealment having been effected and then the police 
having been led to the location and the material object recovered 
from the place of concealment. Recital in the seizure list is only that 
‘on being shown and certified by accused 1 and 2’. Concealment 
and its knowledge, revealed from the statement of the accused, is 
the crucial ingredient of Section 27 which can lead to that being 
used in a criminal trial, any other confession to a police officer being 
excluded as self-incriminating.

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
601
Papan Sarkar @ Pranab v. State of West Bengal
13.	 Further, the said recoveries are/ made on 02.11.2012 and the same 
was witnessed by PW5, the Pradhan who had come to the place of 
occurrence at the time of the recovery of body, on 31.10.2012 and at 
the time of recovery, on 02.11.2012. In fact, the testimony of PW5 is 
that the signature on the inquest report and the seizure report are his 
and it relates to one broken spectacles, one stone, one gangee and 
four pairs of sandals and one single sandal. It is not clear from the 
testimony of PW5 as to which were seized by the police on 31.10.2012 
and what was recovered on 02.11.2012. The recovery thus has no 
clarity and more importantly the accused pointing out the concealed 
objects or even their presence at the time was not deposed to by PW5.
14.	 The recovery on 02.11.2012, as evidenced from the seizure report, 
was with respect to four items; the stone, a broken glass and two 
spectacles, one of which was broken, not testified to by PW5. The 
other objects were seized at the time of inquest from the place of 
occurrence from where the body was recovered. Yet again as we 
already observed there is no statement taken of the accused of 
a concealment and the recoveries made do not qualify to be one 
under Section 27. The stains on the stone found at the place of 
occurrence and the serology report of it being human blood, hence, 
is of no consequence. 
15.	 We also have to observe that the seizure is said to have been made 
in the presence of both the accused without indicating as to who 
out of the two revealed the concealment. As a matter of fact, PW16, 
the Investigating Officer, testifies that both the accused A1 and A2 
informed him that if they are taken to the place of occurrence they 
would recover the stone and broken glass with which the deceased 
was murdered and also the motorcycle of Samir; the last of which 
we will deal with a little later. Here we have to emphasize that PW5, 
the witness to the recovery, categorically stated that neither the stone 
nor the glass piece was produced in Court and hence not confronted 
to the witness. More pertinently the alleged weapons of assault were 
not shown to the Doctor to elicit his opinion as to whether the said 
objects could have caused the injuries found on the dead body. The 
recoveries are of no avail and do not form a clinching incriminating 
circumstance against the accused.
16.	 Yet another recovery is that of the motorcycle of the deceased. In 
fact, PW12 speaks of information received about the motorcycle 

602
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
having been kept in a house by A1 and A3 and recovered from there, 
prior to the arrest of the accused and in the course of the ongoing 
search, in the morning of 31.10.2012. PW9 is the house owner 
who spoke of three persons having come to his house to park the 
vehicle on 30.10.2012, however, he failed to identify the accused. 
The discrepancy noticed insofar as the recovery of the alleged 
weapons of assault, equally applies in the case of the seizure of 
the motorcycle also. Pertinent also is the fact that the motorcycle 
though handed over to PW1 on challan the same was not produced 
before Court nor was its registration details proffered to indicate 
that it belongs to the deceased or PW1, as is the version of PW1. 
PW1 was also not asked about the recovery of the motorcycle and 
handing over by the police. 
17.	 One other incriminating circumstance was projected through PW4, the 
aunt of A3. PW4 was put in the box to speak of A3 having come to 
her on the night of 30.10.2012 to keep his bike in her house, having 
run out of petrol. There was nothing elicited from PW4 in her chief 
examination but for marking a statement recorded by the Magistrate. 
In cross examination she categorically stated that after the death of 
his son, PW1 had been frequently visiting her and threatening her 
with dire consequences if she does not depose falsely in the instant 
case. It was in re-examination that she was asked by the Prosecution 
about the statements made to the police, clearly impermissible. 
Even when she was asked the said questions, first she denied A3 
having come to her house at night and then she admitted it. There 
can be no credence placed on such a witness or an incriminating 
circumstance found from her testimony. One other aspect is that 
there is no motive projected, which we are quite conscious is not 
imperative when the chain of circumstances is so complete as to 
establish only a hypothesis of guilt, without leaving any room for a 
hypothesis of innocence. In the present case, the absence of motive, 
especially when the murder was brutal, is yet another aspect raising 
a reasonable doubt.
18.	 In the totality of the circumstances, each having been examined 
by us, none of those projected having qualified as incriminating, 
linking the accused to the murder, we cannot but reverse the order 
of conviction handed down by the Trial Court and affirmed by the 
High Court. The appeals stand allowed and the appellants herein 
shall stand released forthwith if not already released as per our 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
603
Papan Sarkar @ Pranab v. State of West Bengal
orders on the last day of hearing, unless they are required in any 
other case and if released, their bail bonds shall stand cancelled.
19.	 We place on record our appreciation for the meticulous preparation 
and adroit presentation of both the learned Counsel.
20.	 Before we leave the matter, we see that the appeals have been filed 
only by A1 and A2. A3 too has been languishing in jail along with 
A1 and A2 and for reasons best known has not chosen to file an 
appeal. In the circumstance of having acquitted the two accused, it 
is only proper that A3 also be provided assistance to file an appeal. 
We direct the Member Secretary, National Legal Services Authority 
to get in touch with the Member Secretary of the West Bengal 
State Legal Services Authority, who shall through the Secretary of 
the District/Taluk Legal Services Authority, having jurisdiction over 
the prison in which A3 is imprisoned, provide sufficient assistance 
to A3 and ensure that an appeal is filed before this Court from the 
impugned judgment. The same shall be done within a period of two 
months and the compliance be reported to us, for which purpose 
alone the matter is posted on 20th of July, 2026.
21.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
