[2026] 6 S.C.R. 604 : 2026 INSC 535
Gour Acharjee
v.
The State of Tripura & Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1803 of 2014)
25 May 2026
[Prashant Kumar Mishra and K. V. Viswanathan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether, in a case of death occurring within the absolute privacy 
of a matrimonial home, the prosecution has established beyond 
reasonable doubt that the victim’s death was a homicidal hanging 
staged by the appellant-husband after an assault—thereby shifting 
the burden of explaining the special facts to the husband—or 
whether it was a case of voluntary suicidal hanging as claimed 
by the appellant.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.302 – Victim-deceased, wife of appellant, 
was subjected to dowry demand by her in-laws – She was 
tormented and tortured – Victim died within about fifteen 
months of marriage – The complainant received information 
that his daughter committed suicide by hanging herself – FIR 
was registered u/ss.498A, 304B and 34 – However, the trial 
Court framed charges u/ss.498A and 302 of IPC r/w s.34 – 
Trial Court convicted Appellant (A1), appellant’s mother (A2), 
appellant’s brother (A3) and acquitted appellant’s father (A4) – 
The High Court confirmed the conviction of A1, however, 
acquitted A2 and A3 – A1 has filed this appeal against his 
conviction:
Held: The injuries found on the body of the deceased are not 
consistent with an ordinary case of suicidal hanging – The 
existence of ante mortem injuries on different parts of the body 
of deceased is not ordinarily capable of being self-inflicted – This 
fact substantially undermines the defence version of suicide – 
In the present case, the medical evidence indicates that the 
deceased has been subjected to violence prior to her death 
thereby negating the theory of voluntary suicidal act – There is 
* Author

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
605
Gour Acharjee v. The State of Tripura & Ors.
no hesitation in confirming the finding of the trial Court and the 
High Court that the death was due to the head injury and that 
the deceased was put on hanging – Further, summary of other 
relevant prosecution witnesses give clear evidence to the effect 
that there was consistent torture of the deceased with regard to the 
demand for dowry especially for the motorcycle and cash – The 
medical opinion clearly points to simulated hanging or homicidal 
hanging – It is well settled that if an offence takes place inside 
the privacy of a house, though the initial burden to establish the 
case would be on the prosecution there will be a corresponding 
burden on the inmates of the house to give a cogent explanation 
as to how the victim succumbed – In the present case, PW-14 
clearly states of the presence of the appellant when the body of 
the deceased was found hanging – When confronted with the 
circumstances u/s.313, Cr.P.C., the appellant did not choose 
to offer any explanation – The appellant did not endeavour 
to discharge the burden and to explain the injuries on the 
deceased by offering a plausible explanation – His defence that 
it was a case of suicide has been belied by the overwhelming 
medical evidence – Appellant directed to be taken in custody. 
[Paras 11-13, 25, 28, 31, 32]
Case Law Cited
Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra [2006] Supp. 7 
SCR 156 : (2006) 10 SCC 681 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Modi’s Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology [Twenty-third Edition]; 
Dr. C.K. Parikh’s Text Book of Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology 
[Fourth Edition] – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Murder; Dowry death; Torment; Torture; Dowry; Harassment; 
Suicide; Homicide; Burden of proof; Privacy of home; Forced 
reconciliation; Ante-mortem injuries; Suicidal hanging; Staged 
suicidal hanging.

606
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1803 of 2014
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.08.2012 of the Gauhati 
High Court in CRLA No. 58 of 2009
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Diksha Rai, Ms. Atiga Singh, Ms. Purvat Wali, Sagun Srivastava, 
Sourabh Dahiya, Abhishek Jaiswal.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Shuvodeep Roy, Deepayan Dutta, Saurabh Tripathi, Subhro Sanyal.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
Could the life of young Soma Acharjee have been saved? Did the fear 
of societal opprobrium result in Soma being thrown to the wolves? 
These questions will remain hypothetical. Within a few days after her 
marriage, the deceased, Soma, was subjected to immense torture 
on account of demand for dowry. She repeatedly made entreaties to 
her parents to save her and even came to her parental home and 
stayed with them for a few days. However, every time she raised 
the issue, efforts were made only to effect a patch-up and send her 
back to the matrimonial home. Village elders were involved and even 
resolutions were passed after effecting a purported compromise. 
Soma’s near and dear naively believed that somehow -somehow- the 
situation will turn for the good. A false sense of optimism engulfed 
them. Their hopes were betrayed when Soma met with a tragic end 
at her matrimonial home. Hopefully, the story of her life will be an 
eye-opener for many.
2.	
The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the judgment 
dated 24.08.2012 in Criminal Appeal (J) No. 58 of 2009 passed by 
the High Court of Gauhati, Agartala Bench. By the said judgment, 
the High Court confirmed the judgment of the Additional Sessions 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
607
Gour Acharjee v. The State of Tripura & Ors.
Judge, Sonamura, West Tripura, dated 03.06.2009 by which the 
appellant was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for life 
(and to pay a fine of Rs. 10,000/-) for offence punishable under 
Section 302 IPC and rigorous imprisonment for a period of 3 years 
for offence punishable under Section 498A of IPC. Appropriate default 
sentences were also imposed. 
3.	
Along with the appellant (A1), appellant’s mother Arati Acharjee (A2), 
appellant’s brother Nitai Acharjee (A3) and Appellant’s father Bimal 
Acharjee (A4) were tried together. Though the Trial Court acquitted 
A4, Bimal Acharjee, the father, it convicted the mother and brother 
along with the appellant. They have also since been acquitted by 
the High Court and the State is not in appeal.
BRIEF FACTS:-
4.	
The deceased is Soma Acharjee, wife of the appellant. She died on 
16.06.2007. The prosecution was set in motion by a First Information 
Report lodged on the very same day at around 12:15 hours by PW-7 
Swapan Acharjee, the father of the deceased. According to the FIR, 
about fifteen months ago, the deceased was given in marriage to the 
appellant. The deceased was subjected to dowry demand by her in-
laws and was tormented and tortured. FIR states that the panchayat 
had to intervene and the daughter was taken back from the parental 
home to the matrimonial home on several occasions. The complainant 
avers that on 16.06.2007, he received information that his daughter 
committed suicide by way of hanging herself. Suspecting that the 
in-laws were responsible, he lodged the FIR which was registered 
for offences under Section 498A, 304B and 34 of IPC. 
5.	
The Trial Court, however, framed charges against the accused 
under Section 498A and 302 of the IPC read with Section 34. At the 
Trial, the prosecution examined 15 witnesses and marked several 
exhibits. The accused were examined under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. 
No witness was examined by the defence.
6.	
We have heard Ms. Diksha Rai, learned counsel for the appellant and 
Mr. Shuvodeep Roy, learned counsel for the State. Both counsels 
very ably presented their respective points of view. They exhaustively 
took us through the records of the case. We have considered their 
submissions including the written submissions. We have also perused 
the original trial Court records.

608
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
HOMICIDAL NATURE OF DEATH:-
7.	
The Trial Court and the High Court had no difficulty in concluding 
that the accused died a homicidal death. PW-13, Dr. Bhanu Bhusan 
Deb, who was posted as Medical Officer at Boxanagar Primary 
Health Centre conducted the postmortem on 16.06.2007. He was 
also examined at the Trial. We have perused the postmortem report 
and his deposition. PW-13 reiterated the contents of the post mortem 
report which was as follows:-
“On 16-06-08 (sic) I was posted as MO at Boxanagar PHC. 
On that day I conducted post mortem on the dead-body 
of Soma Acharjee as was identified by Pintu Kr. Sarkar 
and others. On physical examination of the dead-body I 
found the following injuries : 
1. 1/2” X ‘1/2” small haemotomma over sternum (front 
middle portion of chest) 
2. 1/2” X 1/2” sized small haemotomma over right angle 
of the mandible (right side of the face jaw) 
3. 1/2” X 1/2” sized haemotomma over occipital area.
No typical ligature mark was seen. A flat depressed 
measuring 3” X 5” (U shaped) over left side of neck 
was found. No abrasion or acchimosis on that area 
was seen. 
There was depressed fracture of the scalp. No cervical 
vertribae fracture was seen. The details about the injuries· 
seen in the thoarax region, abdomen and muscles, bones 
and joints are mentioned in the report, at pages 2 & 3. 
More detail description about the external and internal 
injuries is mentioned in the report. 
From the external and the internal injuries observed 
during the post mortem examination in my opinion, 
the cause of death was head injury caused by blunt 
weapon like hammer. This opinion is mainly based 
on the injury No.3 above mentioned, which resulted 
in congestion of the effected areas. The consequent 
depressed fracture of occipital area caused pita, dora, 
arachnoids of matter of that effected area getting 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
609
Gour Acharjee v. The State of Tripura & Ors.
congested. The brain tissue of the effected area was 
also congested.
The patient was later on put on hanging so it was a 
case of homicidal hanging. The basis of this conclusion 
is that there was no typical hanging ligature mark, on 
the left lateral side of neck where skin tissues were 
pressed with an area of 3” X 5” (U shaped) where no 
abrasion or acchimosis was seen. This was indicative 
of circulatory failure. There was no inflammatory sign 
seen. The person was dead and so called pressed 
area was below the thyroid cartilage. There was no 
congestion seen in conjunctiva, eye lids, face, nose, 
oropharynx, laringo-pharinx and tongue which are 
generally seen in a case of hanging. Tongue was not 
also protruded. There was no vaginal discharge. No 
fecal matter was seen in the annus, which are generally 
seen in a typical hanging death case.
OPINION OF DOCTOR AS TO CAUSE OF DEATH
From the above findings, I am in the opinion that the 
lady was died due to head injury caused by blunt 
weapon like hammer and then she was put on hanging. 
So, this is a case of homicidal hanging.”
(Emphasis supplied)
8.	
We are amply supported here by the literature on medical 
jurisprudence. In this case, the doctor (PW-13), has noticed injuries 
on the chest, jaw and on the head of the deceased. There was no 
typical ligature mark. Further, there was no abrasion or ecchymosis 
near the skin tissue on the left lateral side of the neck. No inflammatory 
sign was seen. No congestion was seen in conjunctiva, eyelids, face, 
nose, oropharynx, laryngopharynx and tongue. The tongue was not 
protruded. There was no vaginal discharge and no fecal matter was 
seen in the anus.
9.	
In Modi’s Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology [Twenty-third Edition], 
dealing with the characteristics of death by hanging, it is set out as 
under: -

610
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“However, one can safely say that death was due to 
hanging, if, in addition to the cord mark, there was dribbling 
of saliva from the angle of mouth, ecchymoses and slight 
abrasions around the ligature-mark, laceration of the intima 
of the carotid arteries with extravasation of blood within 
their walls and the post-mortem signs of asphyxia, besides 
if there are no evidence of a struggle, scratches and nail 
marks, fatal injuries or poisoning.”
10.	 Equally informative is Dr. C.K. Parikh’s Text Book of Medical 
Jurisprudence and Toxicology [Fourth Edition]. The learned author 
dealing with the attributes of hanging and how it was not uncommon 
to kill a victim and suspend the person’s body elucidates as under: -
“Whether death was due to hanging: It is not uncommon 
in India to kill a victim and then suspend his body 
(postmortem hanging) from a tree or rafter to mislead 
the relatives and the police. In such a case, a ligature 
mark is usually found. Therefore, when a person is found 
dead and his body suspended, no opinion can be given 
from the ligature mark alone. Death could be attributed 
to hanging if one finds (1) a ligature mark with petechial 
haemorrhages and ecchymoses into its substance (2) 
dribble-marks of saliva (3) tear of the intima of carotid 
arteries with extravasation of blood within their walls (4) 
congestion and haemorrhage in the lymph nodes above 
and below the ligature mark, and (5) absence of fatal 
injuries and poisoning.” 
Again, dealing with injuries in the case of a person found hanging, 
the learned author sets out as follows: -
“Injuries: When injuries are present on bodies found 
hanging, several possibilities exist for their causation. They 
might be suicidal, such as cut throat, cuts of the wrists, etc. 
They could also be homicidal, the individual having 
been beaten to death and then subsequently hanged to 
make it appear as a case of hanging. The nature of the 
injuries will help in many cases. As for example, fractures 
of multiple ribs, several contusions all over the body, and 
rupture of viscera can only be homicidal. It should be 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
611
Gour Acharjee v. The State of Tripura & Ors.
remembered that accidental injuries may be sustained due 
to violent convulsions which may precede death when the 
body of the person may strike the nearby wall or furniture. 
Postmortem injuries such as fractured limbs or ribs may 
occur when the ligature is cut and the body falls from a 
height or during attempts at resuscitation.” 
11.	 Significantly, the injuries found on the body of the deceased are not 
consistent with an ordinary case of suicidal hanging. The existence of 
ante mortem injuries on different parts of the body of deceased Soma 
is not ordinarily capable of being self-inflicted. This fact substantially 
undermines the defence version of suicide. As demonstrated earlier, 
treatises on medical jurisprudence recognised the fact that where 
signs of assault or struggle are found on a body, later discovered 
hanging, the possibility of a case of simulated hanging cannot be 
lightly disregarded. In the present case, the medical evidence indicates 
that the deceased has been subjected to violence prior to her death 
thereby negating the theory of voluntary suicidal act. 
12.	 Hence, we have no hesitation in confirming the finding of the trial 
Court and the High Court that the death was due to the head injury 
and that the deceased was put on hanging. 
SUMMARY OF OTHER RELEVANT PROSECUTION WITNESSES:-
13.	 Dhiraj Biswas (PW-1), who was the Upapradhan of South Kalamchura 
village speaks about the deceased having talked about the torture by 
her appellant-husband for the delay in the delivery of a motorcycle 
that was demanded by him. He also speaks about a compromise 
being effected and how she went back to the house of her husband 
after a resolution (Ex-1) was drawn up. He also speaks about the 
death of the deceased about 20 days after the said resolution. PW-1 
deposed that upon hearing the news of the death, he immediately 
rushed to the house of the appellant and saw the dead body hanging.
14.	 Pintoo Kumar (PW-2), who was a neighbour speaks about how 
Swapan Acharjee (PW-7)-father of the deceased-Soma had come 
to him complaining of trouble between the deceased Soma and her 
husband-appellant. He also speaks about how he advised PW-7 
to go to PW-1. He further reiterates the meeting and the resolution 
passed. PW-2 deposed that the deceased did not make any complaint 

612
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
against any other person except her husband – the appellant. This 
witness on the aspect of the discovery of the hammer stated that he 
was asked to sign a seizure list by Sub-inspector-Nirpati Bhushan 
Das. The witness was declared hostile. The witness in the cross-
examination by the public prosecutor denied that deceased Soma 
informed him that all four accused persons tortured her and demanded 
motorcycle and money. He further denied that after motorcycle was 
given, the deceased informed him that the appellant tortured her. 
15.	 Ranu Das (PW-5), speaks about the panchayat and the resolution 
passed as spoken to by PW-1. In the cross-examination, PW-5 
submitted that, according to their understanding, the deceased and 
the appellant doubted each other about their character. PW-5, in 
cross-examination denied the suggestion that the deceased Soma 
did not inform in the meeting of the villagers about her husband 
torturing her. She further denied the suggestion that the parents of 
the deceased did not inform her that the deceased was being tortured 
by the appellant. Haripada Nama (PW-6), like PW-2, did not support 
the prosecution on the seizure of the hammer.
16.	 Swapan Acharjee (PW-7), the father of the deceased, deposed that 
after two months of the marriage, deceased Soma informed him that 
she was being tortured by her husband, mother-in-law and brother-
in-law for delivery of the motorcycle immediately and for payment of 
cash amount; that he immediately sent the T.V. set and sought time 
for the delivery of the motorcycle; that after seven days, deceased 
Soma rang him up and informed that she was being assaulted and 
tortured by the husband, mother-in-law and brother-in-law for failure 
to deliver the motorcycle; that he conveyed that within seven days 
the appellant could come and take delivery of the motorcycle, and 
that he went to Agartala purchased a motorcycle and delivered it to 
the appellant. PW-7 further deposed that within four days, there was 
a phone call from the deceased informing him that she was being 
tortured for the cash amount. That on hearing this, he went to the 
house of the appellant and thereafter informed the matter to PW-5 
and ultimately attended the meeting at the house of PW-1.
17.	 PW-7 further deposed that the meeting ended with Soma being 
advised to stay with the husband; that after two days, deceased 
Soma again called over phone and informed about the torture by the 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
613
Gour Acharjee v. The State of Tripura & Ors.
husband, mother-in-law and brother-in-law; that there was a further 
meeting in the house of PW-5; that again she was advised to stay 
with the husband; that within four days of the second meeting, the 
deceased rang up to say that the torture had become unbearable; 
that within a fortnight, a third meeting was held; that in this meeting 
also deceased Soma expressed her inability to stay in the house 
because of the prolonged torture by the appellant, brother-in-law 
and mother-in-law, and that he was helpless since he had met all 
demands.
18.	 PW-7 deposed that after 15 days the appellant went to the house 
of PW-7 with the deceased and left her there; that the deceased 
informed him that she was severely assaulted by her mother-in-law 
and brother-in-law in the absence of the husband. That he learnt 
from PW-5 that the appellant had disposed of the motorcycle and left 
for Bihar; that after about a month the appellant came to his house 
and asked the deceased to accompany him to Bihar; and that the 
appellant on being advised to think over the matter left alone.
19.	 PW-7 deposed that he contacted the Upapradhan and PW-2 with 
regard to the return of Soma; that again a meeting was held on 
27.05.2007 which both families attended. That at the meeting, the 
deceased cried and complained of torture. That PW-2 took the 
initiative to settle the matter and asked the appellant and his brother 
to seek pardon and to promise that they would not torture Soma and 
that Bimal Acharjee and Arati were also advised to ensure that there 
was no torture. PW-7 deposed that the resolution of the meeting 
was reduced into writing and signatures of both sides were taken. 
20.	 PW-7 stated that it was decided in the meeting that if there was 
further torture, the matter would be taken up as per law; that after 
the meeting, the deceased accompanied the accused to their house 
and that on 16.06.2007, the appellant informed him over phone that 
the deceased Soma had committed suicide by hanging. He deposed 
that thereafter he went to the Police Station and filed a complaint; 
that with the police he went to the house and found the dead body 
hanging from the roof in a room on the southern side and that as 
the body was being brought down he saw a black spot on the neck 
and another on the chest. PW-8, wife of PW-7 and mother of the 
deceased, also deposed on the same lines as her husband.

614
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
21.	 PW-12-Titan Das is the neighbor of the appellant. He deposes to the 
effect that about a year and a half back, one morning around 7.00 
AM, when he went to the house of the appellant to bring a pen he 
found the dead body of Soma hanging from the ceiling. He deposed 
that he cried and returned home and did not see anybody in the 
room. He was declared hostile and cross-examined with regard to 
his previous statement that he had seen the appellant lying on the 
bed and about how he asked the appellant to deliver the pen and, 
thereafter, on seeing the body of the deceased hanging he asked the 
appellant about it. He denied the suggestion. He admitted that he had 
come to the court with the accused persons. In cross-examination, 
he deposed that when he saw the deceased hanging, there was still 
life in her and she was moving her hands and legs.
22.	 PW-14 Jitendra Das is an important witness. A neighbour of the 
appellant, he deposed that about one and a half years back - 
two days before the death of the deceased, he had asked Soma 
whether she had taken food. She stated that her mother-in-law had 
not given her food and that she had taken food elsewhere; that 
the next evening, on return to his house he found the deceased 
sitting on the verandah and altercation with hue and cry was going 
on inside the house of the appellant and that even at 11.00 PM, 
the deceased was sitting on the verandah. That around 1.30 AM, 
he heard cries and that the following morning around 6.35 AM, he 
heard the cries of Soma - the deceased saying “Ma... go” twice. 
That after 3-4 minutes, he heard the cries of PW-12, Titan Das; 
that he came out and asked Titan Das as to what happened and 
Titan Das told him that Soma had committed suicide. The witness 
deposed that immediately he rushed to the appellant’s room and 
found the appellant lying on the bed with face downwards on the 
pillow and the witness found the body of Soma hanging from the 
ceiling.
23.	 PW-14 further deposed that he did not see any stool or anything 
and he wondered how she could have hung herself. He thereafter 
deposed that the body was hanging with a piece of saree usually 
worn by the appellant’s mother; that he called for appellant’s 
parents from the northern side room and that police arrived about 
an hour later. During cross-examination, he was confronted with 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
615
Gour Acharjee v. The State of Tripura & Ors.
his statement about how the facts set out by him now were not 
part of the statement. However, he reiterated that he had stated 
the same to the police. He, however, admitted that he did not state 
to the police that he saw Soma’s body hanging with the saree of 
appellant’s mother.
24.	 Though in the cross-examination of PW-1 and PW-2, it was 
suggested that there was a boundary dispute between PW-14 and 
the appellant’s family and the accused in 313 statement did refer to 
the same, we are not convinced that such a dispute would by itself 
constitute a sufficient motive to falsely implicate the appellant in a 
serious offence relating to the death of the deceased Soma. PW-14 
denied the suggestion that he was deposing against the appellant 
due to previous enmity. PW-14 is a neighbour and his presence is 
natural and cannot be doubted.
25.	 There is clear evidence to the effect that there was consistent torture 
of the deceased with regard to the demand for dowry especially for 
the motorcycle and cash. Repeated panchayats have been held, as 
spoken to by the witnesses hereinabove. Even though on the same 
evidence, the three other accused have been acquitted and the State 
has not challenged the same in appeal, we are not inclined to acquit 
the appellant for the offence under Section 498A in the teeth of the 
direct overwhelming evidence against the appellant.
IS THE APPELLANT GUILTY OF MURDER:-
26.	 The further question is whether the appellant has been rightly found 
to be guilty for the offence under Section 302. We have already found 
that the doctor’s evidence, namely, PW-13, Dr. Bhanu Bhushan Dev, 
and the post-mortem report (Exh.13) have been rightly accepted 
by the courts below to conclude the homicidal nature of the death. 
The trial Court acquitted A-4-Bimal Acharjee and the High Court 
had acquitted A-2 (Arati Acharjee) and A-3 (Nitai Acharjee) for the 
offence under Section 302.
27.	 While the trial Court acquitted A-4 since nothing emerged in 
evidence against the father-in-law, the High Court acquitted the 
mother-in-law and the brother-in-law on the ground that the two were 
not sharing the same dwelling hut though they were in the same 
compound.

616
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
28.	 As far as A-1, the appellant is concerned, both the courts are 
categoric that it was the appellant who was in the dwelling unit with 
the deceased when she was found dead. The medical opinion clearly 
points to simulated hanging or homicidal hanging. It was the bounden 
duty of A-1 to put forward a reasonable and probable cause of her 
death and also to explain the injuries which the deceased sustained 
prior to her death. 
29.	 It is well settled that if an offence takes place inside the privacy of 
a house, though the initial burden to establish the case would be 
on the prosecution there will be a corresponding burden on the 
inmates of the house to give a cogent explanation as to how the 
victim succumbed. 
30.	 In the landmark judgment of Trimukh Maroti Kirkan vs. State of 
Maharashtra, (2006) 10 SCC 681, this Court had the following telling 
observations to make: - 
“13. The demand for dowry or money from the parents of 
the bride has shown a phenomenal increase in the last 
few years. Cases are frequently coming before the courts, 
where the husband or in-laws have gone to the extent of 
killing the bride if the demand is not met. These crimes 
are generally committed in complete secrecy inside the 
house and it becomes very difficult for the prosecution 
to lead evidence. No member of the family, even if he is 
a witness of the crime, would come forward to depose 
against another family member. The neighbours, whose 
evidence may be of some assistance, are generally 
reluctant to depose in court as they want to keep aloof 
and do not want to antagonise a neighbourhood family. 
The parents or other family members of the bride being 
away from the scene of commission of crime are not in a 
position to give direct evidence which may inculpate the 
real accused except regarding the demand of money or 
dowry and harassment caused to the bride. But, it does 
not mean that a crime committed in secrecy or inside the 
house should go unpunished.
14. If an offence takes place inside the privacy of a house 
and in such circumstances where the assailants have all the 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
617
Gour Acharjee v. The State of Tripura & Ors.
opportunity to plan and commit the offence at the time and 
in circumstances of their choice, it will be extremely difficult 
for the prosecution to lead evidence to establish the guilt of 
the accused if the strict principle of circumstantial evidence, 
as noticed above, is insisted upon by the courts. A judge 
does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that 
no innocent man is punished. A judge also presides to see 
that a guilty man does not escape. Both are public duties. 
(See Stirland v. Director of Public Prosecutions [1944 AC 
315 : (1944) 2 All ER 13 (HL)] — quoted with approval by 
Arijit Pasayat, J. in State of Punjab v. Karnail Singh [(2003) 
11 SCC 271 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 135] .) The law does not 
enjoin a duty on the prosecution to lead evidence of 
such character which is almost impossible to be led or 
at any rate extremely difficult to be led. The duty on the 
prosecution is to lead such evidence which it is capable 
of leading, having regard to the facts and circumstances 
of the case. Here it is necessary to keep in mind Section 
106 of the Evidence Act which says that when any fact is 
especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden 
of proving that fact is upon him. Illustration (b) appended 
to this section throws some light on the content and scope 
of this provision and it reads:
“(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without ticket. 
The burden of proving that he had a ticket is on him.”
15. Where an offence like murder is committed in secrecy 
inside a house, the initial burden to establish the case 
would undoubtedly be upon the prosecution, but the 
nature and amount of evidence to be led by it to establish 
the charge cannot be of the same degree as is required 
in other cases of circumstantial evidence. The burden 
would be of a comparatively lighter character. In view 
of Section 106 of the Evidence Act there will be a 
corresponding burden on the inmates of the house 
to give a cogent explanation as to how the crime was 
committed. The inmates of the house cannot get away 
by simply keeping quiet and offering no explanation 
on the supposed premise that the burden to establish 

618
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
its case lies entirely upon the prosecution and there is 
no duty at all on an accused to offer any explanation.”
(Emphasis supplied)
Thereafter, in para 22, this Court emphatically laid down as under: -
“22. Where an accused is alleged to have committed 
the murder of his wife and the prosecution succeeds 
in leading evidence to show that shortly before the 
commission of crime they were seen together or 
the offence takes place in the dwelling home where 
the husband also normally resided, it has been 
consistently held that if the accused does not offer any 
explanation how the wife received injuries or offers an 
explanation which is found to be false, it is a strong 
circumstance which indicates that he is responsible 
for commission of the crime. In Nika Ram v. State of 
H.P. [(1972) 2 SCC 80 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 635 : AIR 1972 
SC 2077] it was observed that the fact that the accused 
alone was with his wife in the house when she was 
murdered there with “khukhri” and the fact that the 
relations of the accused with her were strained would, 
in the absence of any cogent explanation by him, point 
to his guilt. In Ganeshlal v. State of Maharashtra [(1992) 
3 SCC 106 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 435] the appellant was 
prosecuted for the murder of his wife which took place 
inside his house. It was observed that when the death 
had occurred in his custody, the appellant is under an 
obligation to give a plausible explanation for the cause 
of her death in his statement under Section 313 CrPC. 
The mere denial of the prosecution case coupled with 
absence of any explanation was held to be inconsistent 
with the innocence of the accused, but consistent with 
the hypothesis that the appellant is a prime accused 
in the commission of murder of his wife. In State of 
U.P. v. Dr. Ravindra Prakash Mittal [(1992) 3 SCC 300 : 
1992 SCC (Cri) 642 : AIR 1992 SC 2045] the medical 
evidence disclosed that the wife died of strangulation during 
late night hours or early morning and her body was set on 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
619
Gour Acharjee v. The State of Tripura & Ors.
fire after sprinkling kerosene. The defence of the husband 
was that the wife had committed suicide by burning herself 
and that he was not at home at that time. The letters 
written by the wife to her relatives showed that the husband 
ill-treated her and their relations were strained and further 
the evidence showed that both of them were in one room 
in the night. It was held that the chain of circumstances 
was complete and it was the husband who committed the 
murder of his wife by strangulation and accordingly this 
Court reversed the judgment of the High Court acquitting 
the accused and convicted him under Section 302 IPC. 
In State of T.N. v. Rajendran [(1999) 8 SCC 679 : 2000 
SCC (Cri) 40] the wife was found dead in a hut which had 
caught fire. The evidence showed that the accused and 
his wife were seen together in the hut at about 9.00 p.m. 
and the accused came out in the morning through the 
roof when the hut had caught fire. His explanation was 
that it was a case of accidental fire which resulted in the 
death of his wife and a daughter. The medical evidence 
showed that the wife died due to asphyxia as a result of 
strangulation and not on account of burn injuries. It was 
held that there cannot be any hesitation to come to the 
conclusion that it was the accused (husband) who was 
the perpetrator of the crime.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
31.	 In the present case, PW-14 clearly states of the presence of the 
appellant when the body of the deceased was found hanging. It was 
also early morning and it is believable that the appellant would be 
in the house. In any event, that fact is not denied by him because 
it was the appellant who informed PW-7, though he told PW-7 that 
the deceased had committed suicide. When confronted with the 
circumstances under Section 313, Cr.P.C., the appellant did not 
choose to offer any explanation. The appellant did not endeavour 
to discharge the burden and to explain the injuries on the deceased 
by offering a plausible explanation. His defence that it was a case 
of suicide has been belied by the overwhelming medical evidence. 
Even if we discount the aspect of discovery of the hammer that does 
not carry the case of the appellant any further.

620
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
32.	 For the reasons stated above, the appeal stands dismissed. We 
have been informed that the appellant is absconding. Now that we 
have dismissed the appeal, steps should be taken immediately to 
trace the appellant and take him into custody. Let a copy of this 
judgment be sent to the Director General of Police, Tripura, who 
shall immediately constitute a team and take steps to apprehend 
the convict. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan


