[2026] 6 S.C.R. 219 : 2026 INSC 475
Ann Saurabh Dutt
v.
Lieutenant Colonel Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt
(Civil Appeal No. 7457 of 2026)
12 May 2026
[Vikram Nath and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
In the C.A. No.7457 of 2026, the appellant simply urged for 
expunging of the observations and findings pertaining to desertion 
and cruelty, while not contesting the grant of divorce, whereas the 
respondent pressed hard for acceptance of his appeal (SLP (civil) 
No.28451 of 2024) and prosecution of the appellant for perjury.
Headnotes†
Marital Dispute – Discord between the spouses – Allegation 
against the appellant-wife of cruelty or desertion – The Family 
Court decreed the suit for divorce on the grounds of cruelty and 
desertion – However, the Family Court rejected an application 
u/s.195 of the CrPC r/w. s.340 CrPC filed by the respondent-
husband – Both the parties filed appeals – The Division Bench 
of the High Court dismissed both the appeals – Correctness:
Held: Having gone through the above findings recorded by the Family 
Judge, this Court finds the approach of the Presiding Judge to be 
pedantic and regressive – The endeavour on the part of the appellant 
to choose a more secure place for bringing up her minor daughter, 
who suffered from a concerning medical condition, could not have 
been construed as an act of desertion under any circumstances – 
True it is that, in ideal conditions, an army officer’s wife would be 
expected to accompany her respondent-husband even if the posting 
is at difficult locations – However, merely because the wife decided 
to reside at Ahmedabad with the primary intention to provide a safer 
environment and better health care to her daughter, where she 
could also pursue her professional career, branding such conduct 
as constituting cruelty or desertion was atrocious – To brandish the 
effort of the wife to pursue her own career goals as acts of cruelty, 
as the same may have hurt the sentiments of the husband or the 
in-laws, is highly objectionable and deplorable in the era where 
* Author

220
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the society proudly talks of women empowerment – Respondent 
has an attitude of domineering and control – The steps so taken 
by the appellant were absolutely justified in view of the prevailing 
facts and circumstances – The observations made by the Family 
Court regarding cruelty and desertion attributed to the appellant are 
unjustified and untenable in the eyes of law – Same deserve to be 
expunged – As the appellant is no longer hopeful of a patch-up or 
resumption of matrimony with the respondent, the decree of divorce 
is upheld – As far as the SLP filed by the respondent is concerned, 
this Court is of the firm opinion that the allegations made by him do 
not disclose the necessary ingredients of the offence of perjury or 
giving false evidence so as to direct prosecution of the respondent – 
Thus, SLP is dismissed. [Paras 21-23, 29, 37, 38]
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Marital Dispute; Discord between the spouses; Divorce; Cruelty; 
Desertion; Perjury; Qualified woman; Professional career; Upbringing 
of her child; Archaic societal assumptions; Progressive evolution of 
society; Dignity; Autonomy; Equal participation of woman.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 7457 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.08.2024 of the High Court 
of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in FA No. 4298 of 2022
With
SLP (Civil) No. 28451 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt, Ms. Jesal Wahi, Kabir Hathi.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt, Ms. Jesal Wahi, Kabir Hathi.
Petitioner-in-person.
Caveator-in-person.

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
221
Ann Saurabh Dutt v. Lieutenant Colonel Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Mehta, J.
Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 25076 of 2024
1.	
Heard.
2.	
Leave granted.
3.	
We are well into the 21st Century, and yet an attempt by a qualified 
woman to pursue her professional career and to secure a safe and 
stable environment for the upbringing of her child has been treated 
as an act of cruelty and desertion by the Courts below. We are 
constrained to observe that the approach adopted by the learned 
Family Court, as affirmed by the High Court, is not only legally 
unsustainable but also deeply disquieting. The endeavour of the 
appellant to establish her own dental clinic at Ahmedabad, rather 
than allowing the professional qualification she had earned through 
years of effort to lie dormant and go waste, has been viewed with 
disapproval, merely because her stance did not conform to the 
expectation of the husband and the in-laws that she must abandon 
her aspirations and reside with her husband at a remote location on 
account of his posting as an Army Officer.
4.	
The reasoning which permeates the impugned judgments appears 
to be founded upon deeply entrenched archaic societal assumptions 
that a wife’s professional identity is subject to an implied spousal veto; 
that her autonomy must yield to the geographical and occupational 
demands of her husband; and that her decision to secure a safer and 
more conducive environment for the upbringing of her child, even at 
the cost of living separately for certain periods, would construe as 
a matrimonial default. Such assumptions, rooted in a conservative 
patriarchal understanding of marital roles, are wholly incompatible 
with the progressive evolution of society, where dignity, autonomy, 
and equal participation of women in all spheres are increasingly 
recognised as fundamental to social advancement.
5.	
It must be emphasised that a well-educated and professionally 
qualified woman cannot be expected to be confined within the rigid 

222
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
boundaries of matrimonial obligations alone. Marriage does not 
eclipse her individuality, nor does it subjugate her identity under that 
of her spouse. It is for both the husband and the wife to balance their 
marital ties in a manner that respects mutual aspirations, and not for 
one to unilaterally dictate the life choices of the other. As has been 
recognised in the evolving discourse on matrimonial jurisprudence, 
a woman can no longer be treated as a mere appendage to the 
household of the husband, and her independent intellectual and 
professional identity and aspirations must receive due credence 
and respect. 
6.	
What is portrayed as defiance in the impugned judgments is, in 
truth, an assertion of independence; what is labelled as desertion 
is, on a closer scrutiny, a consequence of circumstances shaped by 
professional commitments, the welfare of the minor child, and the 
realities of life. To characterise such conduct as cruelty or desertion 
is to effectively penalise the appellant for exercising choices that are 
integral to her dignity and personhood. The expectation that a woman 
must invariably sacrifice her career and conform to traditional notions 
of an obedient wife meant for cohabitation, irrespective of her own 
aspirations or the welfare of the child, reflects a line of reasoning that 
is archaic, ultra-conservative, and cannot be countenanced in the 
present day scenario when women are leading various professional 
fields from the forefront.
7.	
The factual matrix, as it unfolds from the record, would demonstrate 
that the conduct attributed to the appellant as cruelty or desertion 
was, in reality, a manifestation of legitimate choices made in pursuit 
of professional fulfilment and responsible parenthood. It is in this 
backdrop and keeping in view the need to harmonise matrimonial 
obligations with the constitutional guarantee of individual autonomy, 
that the present lis warrants adjudication with a fine balance. 
Background: -
8.	
The appellant and the respondent were married on 3rd September, 
2009. The appellant is a qualified dentist, and the respondent was 
serving in the Indian Army and was posted at Pune.
9.	
The appellant started her own private dental clinic at Pune in the 
month of June, 2010. A year later, the respondent came to be 
posted at Kargil. The appellant sacrificed her dental practice to 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
223
Ann Saurabh Dutt v. Lieutenant Colonel Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt
be besides her husband (respondent) and shifted to Kargil. Both 
stayed together at Kargil for over four months. During this period, 
the appellant conceived. Finding the circumstances not conducive to 
her pregnancy, particularly in view of the limited medical facilities at 
Kargil, the place of posting of the respondent, the appellant returned 
to Ahmedabad and started living with her in-laws.
10.	 However, as per the appellant, owing to the difference in religious 
background from which the parties hail (the appellant is a Christian 
and the respondent is a Hindu), the relationship between them started 
going southwards. The appellant thereafter moved to her parental 
home at Ahmedabad. She gave birth to a female child on 12th April, 
2012, who continues to be in her care and custody. 
11.	 After the birth of the daughter, the appellant went to Kargil to stay 
with the respondent, where the child developed certain medical 
complications, to be specific, seizure episodes, and was required to 
be admitted to the military hospital. As the condition of the child did 
not show improvement and in view of the limited specialized medical 
facilities available at Kargil, the parties returned to Ahmedabad with 
the child so that she could be provided proper further treatment.
12.	 The aforesaid sequence of events precipitated severe discord 
between the spouses. The appellant thereupon approached the 
competent Army authorities seeking maintenance for herself and 
the minor child. The Army authorities, vide order dated 12th May, 
2014, allowed the application and directed the respondent to pay 
22% of his salary to the appellant and 5.5% to the minor daughter. 
It appears that the said order was passed in terms of the applicable 
Army instructions governing maintenance to dependents.
13.	 The order granting maintenance was challenged by the respondent 
before the Armed Forces Tribunal, Lucknow. The matrimonial strife 
between the parties escalated, leading to initiation of multiple 
proceedings before different fora, including the learned Family Court 
No.2 of Ahmedabad City at Ahmedabad1. During the pendency of 
such proceedings, efforts were made to bring about a reconciliation 
between the parties; however, the same did not fructify. Thereafter, 
by order dated 11th February, 2022, the learned Family Court granted 
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “Family Court”.

224
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
interim maintenance to the tune of Rs.55,000/- per month (Rs.35,000/- 
to the appellant and Rs.20,000/- to the minor daughter).
14.	 In revision preferred by the respondent before the High Court for 
assailing the said order, the quantum of interim maintenance was 
modified and the amount payable to the appellant was scaled down 
to Rs.25,000/- per month, while the amount of Rs.20,000/- per month 
awarded to the minor daughter as maintenance was maintained. The 
same terms of maintenance were finalized by the learned Family 
Court vide final order dated 30th September, 2022.
15.	 In the intervening period, the respondent had also filed Family Suit 
No. 2361 of 2017 seeking dissolution of marriage. During the course 
of the said proceedings, he also moved an application under Section 
195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure2, 1973 read with Section 
340 CrPC (Exh. 54), alleging that the appellant had made false 
statements on oath in proceedings relating to interim maintenance, 
and sought her prosecution for perjury. The learned Family Court, 
vide judgment and decree dated 30th September, 2022, decreed the 
suit for divorce on the grounds of cruelty and desertion attributed to 
the appellant and simultaneously, by the same judgment, rejected 
the aforesaid application of the respondent (Exh.54).
16.	 Being aggrieved, the appellant preferred a First Appeal to the High 
Court at Gujarat at Ahmedabad3 challenging the decree of divorce, 
whereas the respondent preferred a separate First Appeal challenging 
the rejection of his application filed under Section 195 of the CrPC 
read with Section 340 CrPC.
17.	 While pressing the appeal, the appellant simply urged for expunging 
of the observations and findings pertaining to desertion and cruelty 
while not contesting the grant of divorce, whereas the respondent 
pressed hard for acceptance of his appeal and prosecution of the 
appellant for perjury. 
18.	 The Division Bench of the High Court dismissed both the appeals 
by judgment dated 12th August, 2024 which is assailed by both the 
parties in this appeal by special leave.
2	
For short, ‘CrPC’.
3	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “High Court”.

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
225
Ann Saurabh Dutt v. Lieutenant Colonel Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt
19.	 We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the 
respondent, who appeared in-person, and have considered the 
submissions advanced. The appellant Ms. Ann has just prayed for 
expungement of the findings of desertion and cruelty which prayer 
was hotly contested by the respondent Saurabh Dutt. Thus, we 
have perused and gone through the findings of the Family Court 
on these issues and find the same to be appalling and totally 
unacceptable.
20.	 At this stage, we would like to extract the findings recorded by the 
learned Family Court, while granting divorce and dissolving the 
marriage of the parties, which are as below:-
(i)	
That the appellant was not inclined to continue with the marriage, 
as she gave precedence to her career by operating a dental 
clinic at Ahmedabad;
(ii)	
That the appellant got invitation cards printed for the opening of 
her dental clinic and circulated the same without the knowledge 
of the respondent and his family, which, according to the learned 
Family Court, amounted to cruelty, as it was expected of a 
wife or daughter-in-law that any such step be taken with the 
knowledge of the husband or his family;
(iii)	 That the setting up of the dental clinic without informing the family 
was not reflective of healthy family relations and, according to 
the learned Family Court, such conduct, amounted to disregard 
for the emotions and feelings of the family;
(iv)	 That the request made by the appellant that, during visits to 
Ahmedabad, she be permitted to stay at her parental home was 
also treated as an act of cruelty, as, according to the learned 
Family Court, a married woman is expected to reside with her 
husband at the matrimonial home;
(v)	
That whenever the parties came to Ahmedabad, they resided 
separately, as the appellant stayed at her parental home while 
the respondent stayed at his own residence;
(vi)	 That the allegation of the respondent that, on one occasion, the 
appellant did not permit his mother to take the minor daughter in 
her lap or to touch her, allegedly on account of fear of infection, 
was also treated to be indicative of cruelty;

226
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(vii)	 It was observed by the learned Family Court, in paragraph 
26 of the judgment, that it was the bounden duty of a wife to 
reside with her husband wherever he may choose to reside, 
and that the husband could not be deprived of his conjugal 
rights except under special circumstances which absolved the 
wife of such duty. The appellant’s attempt to run her own dental 
clinic was held to be indicative of an intent not to reside with 
the respondent at his place of posting and was accordingly 
treated as desertion;
(viii)	 In paragraph 27 of the judgment, the learned Family Court 
observed that the marriage between the parties had irretrievably 
broken down and that a decree of divorce was warranted on 
account of such breakdown, resulting from acts of cruelty and 
desertion on the part of the appellant.
21.	 Having gone through the above findings recorded by the learned 
Family Judge, we find the approach of the Presiding Judge to be 
pedantic and regressive, to say the least. The endeavour on the part 
of the appellant to choose a more secure place for bringing up her 
minor daughter, who suffered from a concerning medical condition, 
could not have been construed as an act of desertion under any 
circumstances. 
22.	 True it is that, in ideal conditions, an army officer’s wife would be 
expected to accompany her husband even if the posting is at difficult 
locations. However, merely because the wife decided to reside at 
Ahmedabad with the primary intention to provide a safer environment 
and better health care to her daughter, where she could also pursue 
her professional career, branding such conduct as constituting cruelty 
or desertion was atrocious to say the least.
23.	 It reflects an ultra-conservative and myopic approach of the Presiding 
Officer. To brandish the effort of the wife to pursue her own career 
goals as acts of cruelty, as the same may have hurt the sentiments 
of the husband or the in-laws, is highly objectionable and deplorable 
in the era where the society proudly talks of women empowerment.
24.	 The learned Family Judge laid much emphasis on the incident 
wherein the appellant inaugurated her dental clinic without informing 
the respondent or her in-laws. The said act was held to be an act of 
cruelty. Looking to the approach that the respondent has displayed 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
227
Ann Saurabh Dutt v. Lieutenant Colonel Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt
all throughout the proceedings, it is apparent that his attitude was 
of male chauvinism claiming an exalted status on account of Army 
service and never to promote or support the career of his own wife, 
herself a qualified Dentist. Under such circumstances, if at all, the 
appellant opened the dental clinic without disclosing the same to 
the respondent, it must have been a decision taken out of sheer 
compulsion and to deter her husband from obstructing her rightful 
pursuit of a professional career. 
25.	 Needless to state that the appellant must have put in great efforts and 
expenditure for acquiring the degree in Dentistry. Thus, the approach 
of the Family Court was clearly meant to convey that the wife even 
though having a degree in Dentistry, should have sacrificed her own 
career to go and stay with her husband at his place of posting and 
failure to do so, tantamounted to committing cruelty by deserting her 
husband. This approach can never be countenanced and deserves 
to be deprecated. 
26.	 In the present world, where women are making strides in leaps and 
bounds, merely because the husband was an Army Officer posted 
in a remote location, the expectation that the wife could not even 
think of pursuing her career in Dentistry, is indicative of regressive 
and feudalistic mindset. We are afraid that the learned Family Court 
would never have taken the same view if there was a role reversal 
and the wife was serving in the Army while the husband was a 
medical professional. In such circumstances the husband would 
never be expected to sacrifice his career merely to remain by the 
side of his wife; his failure to do so would certainly not be branded 
as cruelty and desertion.
27.	 We are of the firm view that in such a situation, striking a balance 
is necessary. If, at all, the wife intended to pursue her medical 
career, then the same should have been supported rather than 
deterring her efforts. The husband should have taken pride in the 
fact that his wife was in pursuit of her career goals rather than 
holding her responsible for breakdown of the marriage on the 
ground that she did not join him at Kargil by sacrificing her career. 
If the lady, having acquired the degree in Dentistry, did not utilise 
the same, that, in our opinion, would be a sinful wastage of talent 
and resources because the seat against which she had acquired 
the degree, would go abegging.

228
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
28.	 It also appears that the Courts below gave much credence to the 
assertion of the respondent to the effect that the appellant sought to 
coerce him to convert to Christianity and that such conduct amounted 
to cruelty. In this regard, it may be noted that the material on record 
does not indicate any clear or credible evidence substantiating 
such allegations, which seem to arise in the backdrop of competing 
claims made by the parties during the course of intense matrimonial 
discord. The only circumstance that emerges with some degree of 
consistency is that the respondent had accompanied the appellant 
to the Velankanni Church in Tamil Nadu, which, by itself, would not 
constitute coercion or cruelty. This aspect may also be viewed in 
the context of the fact that the marriage between the parties was a 
love marriage, solemnised in accordance with the customs and rites 
of both Hindu and Christian faiths, and was subsequently registered 
under the Special Marriage Act.
29.	 Having observed the approach of the respondent during the course 
of hearings and the thrust of his submissions seeking prosecution 
of the appellant, we are convinced that he has an attitude of 
domineering and control, which must have been the probable cause 
for the appellant taking the steps for gaining independence and 
pursuing her career goals. The steps so taken by the appellant 
Ms. Ann were absolutely justified in view of the prevailing facts 
and circumstances.
30.	 Furthermore, the learned Family Court also attributed the irretrievable 
breakdown of the marriage to the so-called acts of cruelty and 
desertion on the part of the appellant. In view of the findings 
recorded supra, the said observations are absolutely baseless and 
unsustainable.
31.	 The judgment of the learned Family Court has been affirmed by 
the High Court vide judgment dated 12th August, 2024. Suffice it 
to say that having found the observations made by the learned 
Family Court regarding cruelty and desertion attributed to the 
appellant to be unjustified and untenable in the eyes of law, we are 
convinced that the same deserved to be expunged and scored off the 
record.
32.	 As the learned counsel for the appellant has, on instructions, stated 
that the appellant is no longer hopeful of a patch-up or resumption of 
matrimony with the respondent, and as the respondent has reportedly 

[2026] 6 S.C.R. 
229
Ann Saurabh Dutt v. Lieutenant Colonel Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt
remarried, we are not inclined to disturb the decree of divorce passed 
by the learned Family Court and affirmed by the High Court. The 
same is accordingly upheld, with the observations regarding cruelty 
and desertion being expressly expunged and set aside. The decree 
shall be deemed to have been passed on the ground of irretrievable 
breakdown of marriage.
33.	 The appeal is thus partly allowed. 
34.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
SLP(Civil) No. 28451 of 2024
35.	 We have heard the petitioner, who appeared in-person, in support 
of his special leave petition assailing the rejection of his application 
filed under Section 195 of CrPC read with Section 340 CrPC, seeking 
prosecution of the respondent for perjury.
36.	 Having given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions of 
Shri Saurabh Iqbal Bahadur Dutt, the petitioner appearing in-person 
and after going through the impugned orders and the other material 
placed on record, we are of the firm opinion that the allegations 
made by the petitioner seeking prosecution of his ex-wife, the 
respondent herein, appear to be instigated by personal vendetta and 
spiteful approach. The same also seems to be fuelled by anger and 
pent-up frustration owing to multiple cases and complaints filed by 
the respondent against him and his family members. 
37.	 In view of the order passed by us in Civil Appeal arising out of SLP 
(Civil) No.25076 of 2024, and upon thoughtful consideration of the 
submissions advanced by the petitioner appearing in-person, as 
also upon perusal of the impugned orders and the material placed 
on record, we are of the firm opinion that the allegations made 
by him do not disclose the necessary ingredients of the offence 
of perjury or giving false evidence so as to direct prosecution of 
the respondent. The grievances sought to be projected appear to 
stem from a hyper-technical dissection of the material on record, in 
the backdrop of multiple disputes between the parties arising from 
escalated matrimonial acrimony. Concurrent findings have been 
recorded by the Courts below in rejecting the application and the 
appeal of the petitioner and thus, we do not find any justifiable reason 
to entertain the prayer made in this petition seeking prosecution of 

230
[2026] 6 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the respondent, by taking recourse to the procedure provided under 
Section 195 CrPC read with Section 340 CrPC. 
38.	 The special leave petition lacks merit and is dismissed as such.
39.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: C.A.No. 7457 of 2026 is Partly allowed and
SLP No. 28451 of 2024 is dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
