[2026] 5 S.C.R. 26 : 2026 INSC 327
Renuka 
v. 
The State of Maharashtra and Another
(Criminal Appeal No. 1783 of 2026)
07 April 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari and Atul S. Chandurkar,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Sessions Court as well as the High Court erred in 
holding that the complaint as filed by the appellant u/s.138 of the 
N.I. Act was liable to be dismissed at the pre-trial stage on the 
ground that the cheque issued by the second respondent was not 
towards any legally enforceable debt.
Headnotes†
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 – ss.138, 139 – Once the 
basic ingredients of s.138 are satisfied, the complaint cannot 
be dismissed at the pre-trial stage on the ground that the 
cheque issued was not towards a legally enforceable debt – 
Appellant’s case that in terms of the settlement agreement 
between her and her husband, her husband had to inter 
alia pay ₹50 crores to her – Second respondent acted as 
a guarantor and issued the cheque in question drawn in 
favour of the appellant – On being presented, the cheque got 
dishonoured with the remark ‘payment stopped by drawer’ – 
Eventually, complaint filed by the appellant u/s.138 against 
the second respondent – Process issued by Metropolitan 
Magistrate – Order set aside by Sessions Court holding that 
on the date of issuance of the cheque in question, there was 
no legally enforceable debt to be satisfied by the drawer – 
Challenged by the appellant, writ petition dismissed by High 
Court – Interference with:
Held: Once the basic ingredients of s.138 are duly satisfied by 
the complainant, the rebuttal of statutory presumption by the 
drawer can only be made during the course of trial – The basic 
ingredients for attracting the provisions of s.138 had been duly 
* Author

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
27
Renuka v. The State of Maharashtra and Another
satisfied by the appellant, at least for issuance of process – When 
the basic ingredients of s.138 stand duly satisfied and the statutory 
presumption u/s.139 gets triggered, coming to a conclusion that 
the cheque was not issued for a legally enforceable debt at 
the pre-trial stage itself without granting an opportunity to the 
complainant to substantiate her case by leading evidence would 
amount to ignoring the statutory presumption that the cheque 
had been issued for a legally enforceable debt or liability – As a 
consequence, the presumption u/s.139 gets washed away even 
prior to commencement of the trial – On facts, the dismissal of 
the complaint as a consequence of setting aside the order issuing 
process is totally unjustified in the absence of any material being 
brought on record by the second respondent to rebut the statutory 
presumption and prove his contention that the cheque was 
issued not towards any enforceable debt or liability – Sessions 
Court committed an error in setting aside the order passed by 
the Metropolitan Magistrate issuing process u/s.138 – High Court 
also fell into error in upholding the order passed by the Sessions 
Judge – Both the orders set aside – Complaint filed by the appellant 
restored for adjudication on merits. [Paras 10, 11]
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 – ss.138, 139 – At the stage of 
issuance of process, the statutory presumption u/s.139 cannot 
be dislodged in a summary manner merely by contending 
that the cheque issued was not for any legally enforceable 
debt or liability:
Held: At the stage of issuance of process by the Metropolitan 
Magistrate, what is prima facie required to be seen is the 
issuance of cheque by the drawer in favour of the complainant, 
its dishonour on presentation by the payee, issuance of statutory 
notice u/s.138 and filing of the complaint within the prescribed 
statutory period – If the drawer does not dispute issuance of such 
a cheque nor does he deny his signature on the dishonoured 
cheque, the statutory presumption as contemplated u/s.139 
comes into play – As a result, the burden would shift on the 
drawer of the cheque to prove that the cheque was not issued 
for any legally enforceable debt or liability – This exercise has to 
be undertaken during the trial either by relying upon the material 
brought on record by the complainant or by the drawer leading 
evidence in rebuttal. [Para 8]

28
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Law Cited
Sunil Todi and Others v. State of Gujarat and Another, 2021 INSC 
823 :  [2021] 9 SCR 1086; Rangappa v. Sri Mohan, 2010 INSC 
289 : [2010] 6 SCR 507; Rajesh Jain v. Ajay Singh, 2023 INSC 
888 : [2023] 13 SCR 788 – referred to.
List of Acts
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.
List of Keywords
Cheque dishonoured; Complaint under Section 138 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 dismissed at pre-trial stage; 
Cheque not towards any legally enforceable debt; Basic ingredients 
of Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 duly satisfied 
by complainant; Order issuing process set aside; Dismissal of 
complaint under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 
1881 unjustified; Statutory presumption under Section 139 of the 
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881; Cheque issued for a legally 
enforceable debt or liability; Drawer does not dispute issuance 
of cheque; Drawer does not deny signature on the dishonoured 
cheque.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1783 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 29.03.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in WP No. 1071 of 2023.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Mukul Rohatgi, Siddharth Bhatnagar, Sr. Advs., Ms. Ranjeeta 
Rohatgi, Gaurav Srivastava, Ms. Shrika Gautam.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Dr. A.M. Singhvi, Kavin Gulati, Sr. Advs., Omkar Deshpande, 
Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Shrirang 
B. Varma, C.D. Mehta, Mahesh Agarwal, Ankur Saigal, Bhavik 
Mehta, Ms. Kajal Dalal, Ms. Deepshika Mishra, Ms. Prakruti,  
E. C. Agrawala. 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
29
Renuka v. The State of Maharashtra and Another
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Atul S. Chandurkar, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
On a complaint filed under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments 
Act, 18811, learned Metropolitan Magistrate on being satisfied 
that there was prima-facie material to proceed against the second 
respondent issued process on 17th June 2022. The second respondent 
invoked the revisional jurisdiction of the Sessions Court for challenging 
the said order. The Sessions Court was of the view that on the 
date of issuance of the cheque in question, there was no legally 
enforceable debt to be satisfied by the drawer. By the order dated 
30th December 2022, it set aside the order passed by the learned 
Metropolitan Magistrate issuing process. The complainant approached 
the High Court of Bombay by filing a writ petition under Article 227 
of the Constitution of India and challenged the order passed by the 
Sessions Court. The learned Single Judge, however, dismissed the 
writ petition observing that no error of jurisdiction was found in the 
impugned order. Being aggrieved, the complainant has challenged 
the aforesaid orders in this Criminal Appeal. 
3.	
Shorn of necessary details, the facts relevant for considering the 
challenge as raised are that it is the case of the appellant that she had 
some disputes with her husband, Mr. Ashwin Natwarlal Sheth in the 
matter of alleged illegal and fraudulent transfer of shares pertaining to 
Sheth Developers and Realtors (India) Limited and Sheth Developers 
Private Limited. She had filed various complaints after which her 
husband commenced negotiations for amicable settlement of the 
disputes. On 12th January 2022, a final draft settlement agreement 
was finalised and drawn up between the parties. One of the terms 
of the settlement was that the appellant’s husband would gift to 
the appellant the fifth, sixth and seventh floor premises of Natwar 
Bungalow along with interest in a plot located in a Co-operative 
1	
For short, the N.I. Act

30
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Housing Society. He also agreed to pay the appellant a sum of 
₹50 crores on executing a Declaration-cum-Indemnity document 
so as to withdraw the complaints filed by her against her husband. 
With a view to safeguard the interest of the appellant, the second 
respondent, who was a close friend of the appellant’s husband, agreed 
to act as a mediator and to keep the amount of ₹50 crores in an 
escrow account till the actual payment was made by the appellant’s 
husband. Accordingly, on 12th January 2022, the second respondent 
issued Cheque No.080261 for an amount of ₹50 crores in favour of 
the appellant. The appellant claims to have signed the document 
titled as Declaration-cum-Indemnity on 13th January 2022. It is the 
further case of the appellant that the sale of shares of the concerned 
entity was completed contrary to the settlement agreement and the 
appellant’s husband received the sale consideration. The appellant 
accordingly deposited the cheque that had been issued by the second 
respondent for encashment. However, on 06th April 2022, the said 
cheque was dishonoured and returned with the remark ‘payment 
stopped by drawer’. The appellant, on 20th April 2022, issued a 
notice under Section 138 of the N.I. Act to the second respondent. 
The said notice was replied by the second respondent on 04th May 
2022, denying any liability to make such payment. The appellant 
gave her further reply to the second respondent and again called 
upon him to make the necessary payment. Since no further steps 
were taken by the second respondent, the appellant on 16th June 
2022 filed a complaint against the second respondent under Section 
138 of the N.I. Act.
4.	
Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate for the appellant 
submitted that the Sessions Court erred in setting aside the order 
passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate issuing process on 
the premise that the dishonoured cheque had been issued for a debt 
that was not legally enforceable. According to him, on a plain reading 
of the complaint filed by the appellant under Section 138 of the N.I. 
Act coupled with the undisputed position as regards the issuance 
of the cheque by the second respondent, its valid presentation, its 
subsequent dishonour, issuance of the statutory notice and failure 
on the part of the second respondent to comply with the statutory 
notice were the only relevant considerations at the stage of issuance 
of process in the complaint. In other words, it was urged that the 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
31
Renuka v. The State of Maharashtra and Another
presumption under Section 139 of the N.I. Act that operated in favour 
of the payee could be dislodged by the drawer of the cheque only 
during the course of trial and not at the pre-trial stage. When the 
basic ingredients for making out an offence under Section 138 of 
the N.I. Act had been made out and process had been issued by 
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, scuttling the proceedings at 
this stage was unjustified. To substantiate this contention, reliance 
was placed on the decision in Sunil Todi and others Vs. State 
of Gujarat and another2 by urging that the Sessions Court had 
misread the said judgment. It was, thus, submitted that the Sessions 
Court was not justified in coming to the conclusion that the cheque 
in question had not been issued for discharge of any legal liability. 
Such a finding could be rendered only at the trial and not on the 
basis of the statements made during the course of proceedings 
challenging the issuance of process. He, therefore, submitted that 
the impugned orders be set aside and the complaint be restored for 
its adjudication on merits.
5.	
On the other hand, Dr. A. M. Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate for 
the second respondent supported the impugned orders and opposed 
the contentions raised on behalf of the appellant. He submitted that 
both the Courts were justified in coming to the conclusion that the 
cheque in question had not been shown to have been issued towards 
the discharge of any legally enforceable debt. The document dated 
12th January 2022, which was in the form of a settlement agreement, 
was admittedly not signed by the second respondent. There was no 
concluded agreement as such and, therefore, the second respondent 
could not be bound by the statements made in that agreement. The 
liability under the cheque issued by the second respondent would 
arise only after the agreement between the parties was complete. 
The Courts were justified in relying upon the decision in Sunil Todi 
(supra) wherein it was held that where the payment of debt was 
dependent on the happening of an event which never occurred, 
there would be no legally recoverable liability to be satisfied. In 
view of this position on record, no useful purpose would be served 
by continuing the proceedings under Section 138 of the N.I. Act as 
it would amount to an abuse of the process of law. It was, thus, 
2	
2021 INSC 823

32
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
submitted that the complaint having been rightly dismissed by the 
learned Sessions Judge, which order was upheld by the High Court, 
no interference therein was called for. He, therefore, urged that the 
appeal ought to be dismissed.
6.	
We have heard the learned Senior Advocates appearing for the 
parties at length and we have also perused the relevant documentary 
material on record. Having given due consideration to the rival 
submissions, we are of the view that the Sessions Court as well as 
the High Court were not justified in coming to the conclusion that 
the complaint as filed by the appellant under Section 138 of the N.I. 
Act was liable to be dismissed at the pre-trial stage on the ground 
that the cheque issued by the second respondent was not towards 
any legally enforceable debt. 
7.	
Perusal of the complaint filed by the appellant under Section 138 
of the N.I. Act indicates reference to an amicable settlement of 
various disputes between the appellant and her husband, pursuant 
to which the appellant’s husband executed a registered irrevocable 
Power of Attorney dated 10th December 2022 in favour of the 
appellant. It was agreed under the settlement agreement that the 
appellant’s husband would transfer by way of gift three properties 
and also pay an amount of ₹50 crores on the execution of a 
Declaration-cum-Indemnity document. In reciprocation, complaints 
made by the appellant as regards fraudulent transfer of her shares 
in two companies were to be withdrawn. To ensure execution of 
the Declaration-cum-Indemnity document, the second respondent 
acted as a guarantor and issued the cheque in question drawn 
in favour of the appellant. The appellant accordingly signed the 
Declaration-cum Indemnity document on 13th January 2022. 
On getting knowledge of the sale of certain shares contrary to 
the settlement agreement, the appellant presented the cheque 
issued by the second respondent for being honoured. It has been 
further stated that said cheque was dishonoured with the remark 
‘payment stopped by drawer’. A reference is thereafter made to 
the issuance of a statutory notice under Section 138 of the N.I. Act 
dated 20th April 2022, its service on the second respondent and his 
reply dated 04th May 2022 denying any liability. Accordingly, the 
said complaint came to be filed by the appellant. The appellant’s 
statement was duly verified by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate 
and on being prima facie satisfied that the ingredients of Section 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
33
Renuka v. The State of Maharashtra and Another
138 of the N.I. Act were present, process came to be issued to 
the second respondent.
8.	
It is to be borne in mind that at the stage of issuance of process by 
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, what is prima facie required to 
be seen is the issuance of cheque by the drawer in favour of the 
complainant, its dishonour on presentation by the payee, issuance 
of statutory notice under Section 138 of the N.I. Act and filing of 
the complaint within the prescribed statutory period. If the drawer 
does not dispute issuance of such a cheque nor does he deny his 
signature on the dishonoured cheque, the statutory presumption as 
contemplated under Section 139 of the N.I. Act comes into play. As 
a result, the burden would shift on the drawer of the cheque to prove 
that the cheque was not issued for any legally enforceable debt or 
liability. This exercise has to be undertaken during the trial either by 
relying upon the material brought on record by the complainant or 
by the drawer leading evidence in rebuttal. At the stage of issuance 
of process, the statutory presumption under Section 139 of the N.I. 
Act cannot be dislodged in a summary manner merely by contending 
that the cheque issued was not for any legally enforceable debt or 
liability. 
9.	
We may in this regard refer to two decisions of this Court that have 
reiterated the view that once the basic ingredients of Section 138 
of the N.I. Act are duly satisfied by the complainant, the rebuttal of 
statutory presumption by the drawer can only be made during the 
course of trial. 
In Rangappa Vs. Sri Mohan3, it has been explicitly reiterated that 
the presumption mandated by Section 139 of the N.I. Act includes 
the presumption as regards existence of a legally enforceable debt 
or liability. It has been held that Section 139 is an example of a 
reverse onus clause that has been included in furtherance of the 
legislative object of improving the credibility of negotiable instruments. 
The presumption is rebuttable and the accused can raise a defence 
wherein the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability can 
be contested.
3	
2010 INSC 289

34
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
In Rajesh Jain Vs. Ajay Singh4, it has been held as under:
“34. The NI Act provides for two presumptions: Section 
118 and Section 139. Section 118 of the Act inter alia 
directs that it shall be presumed, until the contrary is 
proved, that every negotiable instrument was made or 
drawn for consideration. Section 139 of the Act stipulates 
that ‘unless the contrary is proved, it shall be presumed, 
that the holder of the cheque received the cheque, for the 
discharge of, whole or part of any debt or liability’. It will 
be seen that the ‘presumed fact’ directly relates to one of 
the crucial ingredients necessary to sustain a conviction 
under Section 138.
35. Section 139 of the NI Act, which takes the form of a 
‘shall presume’ clause is illustrative of a presumption of 
law. Because Section 139 requires that the Court ‘shall 
presume’ the fact stated therein, it is obligatory on the 
Court to raise this presumption in every case where the 
factual basis for the raising of the presumption had been 
established. But this does not preclude the person against 
whom the presumption is drawn from rebutting it and 
proving the contrary as is clear from the use of the phrase 
‘unless the contrary is proved’.
36. The Court will necessarily presume that the cheque 
had been issued towards discharge of a legally enforceable 
debt/liability in two circumstances. Firstly, when the drawer 
of the cheque admits issuance/execution of the cheque 
and secondly, in the event where the complainant proves 
that cheque was issued/executed in his favour by the 
drawer. The circumstances set out above form the fact(s) 
which bring about the activation of the presumptive clause. 
[Bharat Barrel Vs. Amin Chand] [(1999) 3 SCC 35]
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
38. As soon as the complainant discharges the burden to 
prove that the instrument, say a cheque, was issued by 
the accused for discharge of debt, the presumptive device 
4	
2023 INSC 888

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
35
Renuka v. The State of Maharashtra and Another
under Section 139 of the Act helps shifting the burden 
on the accused. The effect of the presumption, in that 
sense, is to transfer the evidential burden on the accused 
of proving that the cheque was not received by the Bank 
towards the discharge of any liability. Until this evidential 
burden is discharged by the accused, the presumed fact 
will have to be taken to be true, without expecting the 
complainant to do anything further.”
10.	 A perusal of the revisional order passed by the learned Judge of 
the Sessions Court indicates that he has given much importance to 
the fact that the agreement dated 12th January 2022 was not signed 
by the second respondent and, hence, the issuance of the cheque 
in question was not for any enforceable debt. He also appears 
to have given importance to the dispute between the appellant 
and her husband by stating that it was a matrimonial dispute and 
civil litigation between the said parties was pending in various 
Courts. In our view, the learned Judge misdirected himself when 
he proceeded to give more weightage to the document dated 12th 
January 2022 and in the process, ignored the fact that the basic 
ingredients for attracting the provisions of Section 138 of the N.I. 
Act had been duly satisfied by the appellant, at least for issuance 
of process. The drawing of the cheque by the second respondent, 
its presentation and subsequent dishonour at the instructions of the 
second respondent is not in dispute. The second respondent does 
not also dispute that he had issued the said cheque and that it was 
duly signed by him. The issuance of statutory notice as well as filing 
of the complaint within the prescribed period are also not in dispute. 
In such a situation, when the basic ingredients of Section 138 stand 
duly satisfied and the statutory presumption under Section 139 gets 
triggered, coming to a conclusion that the cheque was not issued for 
a legally enforceable debt at the pre-trial stage itself without granting 
an opportunity to the complainant to substantiate her case by leading 
evidence would amount to ignoring the statutory presumption that 
the cheque had been issued for a legally enforceable debt or liability. 
As a consequence, the presumption under Section 139 of the N.I. 
Act gets washed away even prior to commencement of the trial. We 
are of the view that in the facts of the present case, the dismissal of 
the complaint as a consequence of setting aside the order issuing 
process is totally unjustified in the absence of any material being 

36
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
brought on record by the second respondent to rebut the statutory 
presumption and prove his contention that the cheque was issued 
not towards any enforceable debt or liability. 
Since we are inclined to restore the complaint for being tried on 
merits, it is not necessary to deal with the decision in Sunil Todi 
and others (supra) in detail. Suffice it to observe that even in the 
said decision, it has been held that disputed questions as regards 
existence of outstanding liability are questions of fact that have to 
be determined at the trial on the basis of evidence. 
11.	 For all these reasons, we are of the view that the learned Judge 
of the Sessions Court committed an error in setting aside the order 
dated 17th June 2022 passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate 
issuing process under Section 138 of the N.I. Act. The High Court 
also fell into error in upholding the order passed by the learned 
Sessions Judge. Accordingly, both the aforesaid orders are set aside. 
The complaint filed by the appellant being CC1831/SC/2022 stands 
restored for its adjudication on merits.
We clarify that the complaint shall be decided on its own merits and 
in accordance with law after giving due opportunity to all parties 
concerned. Any observations made in this judgment shall not be 
construed as an expression of opinion on the merits of the said case.
12.	 The Criminal Appeal is allowed in aforesaid terms.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey 
