[2026] 5 S.C.R. 135 : 2026 INSC 353
Kamal Prasad Dubey 
v. 
The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others
(Civil Appeal No(s). 4350-4351 of 2026)
10 April 2026
[Prashant Kumar Mishra and N.V. Anjaria,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Division Bench of the High Court in its impugned 
order misdirected itself in its approach and reasoning to reverse 
the judgment of Single Judge for all the stated facts, reasons and 
circumstances, the non-acceptance of the case of the appellant 
for promotion to the post of Society Manager.
Headnotes†
Madhya Pradesh Cooperative Societies Act, 1960 – Appellant 
having experience 28 years of working in the Society, came 
to be appointed as Sahayak Samiti Sevak vide order dated 
02.09.1987, on permanent basis – He had passed the Higher 
Secondary School Examination – In view of experience of 
the appellant, respondent no.5-Society passed a resolution 
dated 26.02.2014 deciding and resolving to promote the 
appellant from the post of Sahayak Samiti Prabandhak to 
Samiti Prabandhak (Society Manager) – Respondent no. 
5-Society in its meeting held on 02.07.2015 passed a resolution 
recommending the grant of relaxation in the educational 
qualification of the appellant for the purpose of promotion 
to the post of Society Manager – However, the Registrar 
rejected the proposal made by the Board of Directors which 
was also approved by the General Body, taking a stance that 
relaxation could not have been granted – The Single Judge 
of the High Court directed respondent no. 2-Registrar to pass 
order extending the benefit of relaxation in the educational 
qualification granting promotion to the appellant – The Division 
Bench of the High Court held that the Registrar was right in 
declining to grant the relaxation – Correctness:
* Author

136
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: The Registrar, in approving two other employees for 
promotion and negativing and discarding the case of the appellant 
though all the three cases were attended by similar circumstances, 
acted arbitrarily – In the same way stands the case of the appellant 
who was also otherwise qualified and eligible, by extending 
the provision for relaxation in educational qualification, to be 
promoted to the post of Society Manager to sail in the same 
boat with the said two similarly situated employees – Thus, the 
case of the appellant is not one that the appellant seeks parity 
and equality for promotion with ineligibles or that he is not fit to 
be promoted – While on one hand, the Division Bench of the 
High Court in its impugned order recorded that the Registrar 
was within his jurisdiction to refuse the relaxation, it specifically 
observed in the previous paragraph of the impugned order that 
at the relevant time, the discretion for granting relaxation was 
vested with the Board of Directors of the society and not with the 
Registrar – The reasoning in the impugned order amounted to 
a clear contradiction – The equal treatment came to be denied 
to the appellant to his discrimination – It is to be noted that the 
appellant now holds the degree of M.A. and has also successfully 
completed the diploma in computers – The impugned order passed 
by the Division Bench of the High Court is unsustainable in law. 
[Paras 7.1, 7.2, 8.2, 9.1, 9.3, 10]
List of Acts
Madhya Pradesh Cooperative Societies Act, 1960; Constitution 
of India.
List of Keywords
Service Law; Promotion; Educational Qualification; Equal treatment; 
Concept of equality; Doctrine of equality.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 4350-4351 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.11.2019 and 17.12.2019 
of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh Principal Seat at 
Jabalpur in WA No. 1758 of 2019 and RP No. 1665 of 2019,  
respectively.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
137
Kamal Prasad Dubey v. The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Ruchi Gupta, Anirudh Sharma.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Abhimanyu Singh Ga, Yashraj Singh Bundela, Mrs. Pratima Singh, 
Arpit Garg, Ms. Sakshi, Chand Qureshi, Vijay Kumar, Sundeep 
Pandhi, Nand Ram.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
N.V. Anjaria, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
Discrimination is the other name of injustice.
2.1	 The challenge in these appeal addressed by the appellant-
original petitioner to the order dated 11.11.2019 passed by the 
Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur, 
allowing Writ Appeal No. 1758 of 2019, and to order dated 
17.12.2019 dismissing the corresponding Review Petition No. 
1665 of 2019, deserves to be considered in light of the above 
principle.
2.2	 The appellant filed Writ Petition No. 12814 of 2016 before 
learned Single Judge of the High Court in which he challenged 
order dated 07.06.2016 passed by the Commissioner-cum-
Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Bhopal-respondent No. 2 
herein, whereby the request of respondent No. 5- Primary 
Agricultural Cooperative Society for relaxing the educational 
qualification of the appellant for the promotion to the post of 
Society Manager came to be rejected.
2.3	 Learned Single Judge of the High Court, by his order 
dated 22.01.2019, allowed the Writ Petition, setting aside 
the aforementioned order dated 07.06.2016, and directed 
respondent No. 2-Registrar to pass order extending the benefit 
of relaxation in the educational qualification granting promotion 
to the appellant. 

138
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2.4	 The Division Bench, however took the view, as per the impugned 
order, that the discretion to grant the relaxation was with the 
Board of Directors of the society, and not with the Registrar and 
that the appellant since did not have the necessary qualification, 
the Registrar was right in declining to grant the relaxation.
2.5	 It may be mentioned that this Court, in the present proceedings, 
by order dated 05.11.2020, directed that the appellant shall not 
be demoted, which has continued till date.
3.	
Outlining the attendant facts, the appellant who is presently posted 
as Manager, Primary Agriculture Credit Cooperative Society, 
Nayagaon, Panna District-respondent No. 5, a society registered 
under the Madhya Pradesh Cooperative Societies Act, 1960, and 
has the experience of 28 years of working in the Society, came to 
be appointed as Sahayak Samiti Sevak vide order dated 02.09.1987, 
on permanent basis.
3.1	 The service conditions of the employees of the society are 
governed by the service rules framed by the Registrar of 
Cooperative Society in exercise of powers under Section 55(1) 
of the Madhya Pradesh Cooperative Societies Act, 1960. It was 
stated that the earlier Rules framed by order dated 09.10.1990 
came to be substituted with new Rules on 30.08.2013, repealing 
the old Rules. The appellant was appointed as Sahayak Samiti 
Sevak by order dated 02.09.1987. He had passed the Higher 
Secondary School Examination conducted by the Board of 
Secondary Education, Madhya Pradesh, in the year 1984. 
3.2	 At the time when the appellant was appointed as Samiti Sevak, 
he was Higher Secondary passed, and had undergone various 
training programmes. By order dated 23.07.1996, he was 
deputed as Clerk in Jila Sahkari Kendriya Bank. In view of 
experience of the appellant, respondent No.5-Society passed a 
resolution dated 26.02.2014 deciding and resolving to promote 
the appellant from the post of Sahayak Samiti Prabandhak to 
Samiti Prabandhak (Society Manager).
3.3	 One Mr. Sajid Ali was transferred on 19.06.2014 to respondent 
No.5-Society and came to be posted as Samiti Prabandhak, 
which was the post on which the appellant had already been 
working. In that view, when guidance was sought from the 
Registrar, by his communication dated 15.10.2015 the Registrar 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
139
Kamal Prasad Dubey v. The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others
accepted the recommendation made by the Assistant Registrar 
and allowed the appellant to continue on the post of Society 
Manager, having regard to his long work experience. It was 
provided that reasonable time may be given to him to acquire 
the necessary eligibility qualification of graduation as requisite 
under the new rules.
3.4	 Respondent No. 5-Society in its meeting held on 02.07.2015 
passed a resolution recommending the grant of relaxation in 
the educational qualification of the appellant for the purpose 
of promotion to the post of Society Manager, in light of the 
fact that under the old Rules, an employee possessing the 
educational qualification of Higher Secondary was eligible and 
that the appellant possessed such qualification, and further he 
had a long work experience. The General Body of the Society 
ratified the aforesaid resolution of the Board of Directors, in 
the General Body meeting held on 28.09.2015. However, the 
Registrar rejected the proposal made by the Board of Directors 
which was also approved by the General Body, taking a stance 
that relaxation could not have been granted.
3.5	 It is the case of the appellant, based on admitted facts, that 
one Sushil Kumar Tripathi, who also held the qualification of 
Higher Secondary, was promoted by order dated 29.02.2016. 
Similarly, another employee named Ram Swaroop Pandey, also 
a Higher Secondary pass, came to be appointed as Society 
Manager on 12.12.2014, who had 20 years’ work experience 
as against the work experience of more than 28 years to the 
credit of the appellant.
3.6	 As stated, under the old rules prevailing at the time of the 
appointment of the appellant, the educational qualification 
prescribed for the purpose of promotion to the higher post of 
Samiti Prabandhak (Society Manager) was Higher Secondary. 
In the new Rules which came into force on 30.08.2013, any 
additional qualification for the promotion to the said post was 
not prescribed.
4.	
Heard learned advocate on record Ms. Ruchi Gupta with learned 
advocate Mr. Anirudh Sharma for the appellant and learned advocate 
Mr. Yashraj Singh Bundela for respondent Nos.1 to 4 and 6 and 
learned advocate Mr. Chand Qureshi for respondent No.5.

140
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
5.	
It is to be noted that when in the meeting of the Board of Directors 
of respondent No.5-Society passed resolution dated 02.07.2015 to 
consider the case of promotion of the appellant to the post of Samiti 
Prabandhak from the post of Sahayak Samiti Prabandhak and 
recommended him for promotion, several relevant considerations 
were taken into account as could be seen from the proceedings 
of the meeting figuring on record. It was noted in decision No.3 
corresponding to proposal No.3 that no employee of the cadre 
of Samiti Prabandhak has been posted during the last 5 months 
and that due to the same, the work of the institution had been 
suffering. 
5.1	 It was noted that the appellant had been working in the Institution 
since last 26 years, having been appointed on 02.09.1987, and 
that his track record was clean and no charge of irregularities 
of any kind was levelled against him. Further, it was recorded 
that as the society had been receiving satisfactory services 
since last 26-27 years from the appellant, who was the 
senior-most employee, he was unanimously recommended for 
promotion in the interests of smooth conduct and working of the 
society.
5.2	 While ratifying the recommendation of the Board of Directors, 
the General Body in its meeting held on 28.09.2015 expressly 
noted that the proposal of the Board of Directors to promote 
the appellant on the basis of his long work experience was 
justified, that he was rendering regular services for the last 28 
years, and looking to his seniority, competence, and experience, 
the relaxation given in educational qualification was justified. 
It was unanimously decided by the General Body to submit 
the recommendation to the Commissioner-cum-Registrar, 
Cooperative Societies for his approval. 
5.3	 It is to be noticed that the Registrar, by his communication 
dated 07.06.2016, which was the decision impugned in the writ 
petition, without assigning any reason and in a cryptic manner, 
rejected the proposal of the Board of Directors and the General 
Body for granting relaxation in the educational qualification to 
promote the appellant.
5.4	 The said communication dated 07.06.2016, whereby the 
proposal was filed, is extracted hereunder in its relevant part,

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
141
Kamal Prasad Dubey v. The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others
To,
The Chairman, 
Primary Agriculture Credit Cooperative Society  
Nayagaon District Panna M.P. 
Subject: Regarding grant of relaxation in educational 
qualification to Shri Kamal Prasad Dubey posted as Samiti 
Prabandhak in the Society. 
Reference:-Your Office Letter Number Q dated 15/10/2015, 
Please peruse the letter under reference under the above 
mentioned subject. By the letter under reference, proposal 
to grant relaxation in the educational qualification to Shri 
Kamal Prasad Dubey Samiti Prabandhak as per the 
proposal number 5 Decision number 5 dated 02/07/2015 
of the Board of directors has been forwarded. 
After examining the same, the aforesaid proposal is filed. 
(Approved by the Commissioner Cooperative) 
Sd/- Illegible 
Additional Commissioner 
Cooperative, Madhya Pradesh
5.5	 At this stage, Rule 19-A of the Prathmic, Krishi Saakh Sahakari 
Sanstha, Vrihattakar Saakh Sahakari Sanstha, Adim Jati Sewa 
Sahakari Sewa Sanstha, Krishak Sewa Sahakari Sanstha 
Karmchari Sewa (Niyojan, Nibandhan, Tatha Karya Stithi) Niyam, 
2013 may be considered with relevance. It inter alia provided 
that upon acquiring the prescribed qualification, promotion to 
the various classes of posts shall be granted to the employees. 
It was stated that from Class II to Class I, promotion to the 
post of Samiti Prabandhak from the post of Sahayak Samiti 
Prabandhak/Accountant would be granted. It was stated that 
for the purpose of promotion, minimum 5 years’ tenure on 
the present post and acquiring of the prescribed educational 
qualification shall be compulsory requirement and that the 
criteria of promotion shall be seniority-cum-merit.
5.6	 Proviso to said Rule 19A becomes relevant in the facts of the 
case, which reads as under,

142
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
‘Provided that on the basis of employee’s special 
experience/competence/seniority, relaxation in the 
educational qualification for promotion may be granted 
by the Registrar.’
5.7	 Rule 11 of the aforesaid Rules, however, mentioned about 
eligibility criteria. It required that a person should have a 
graduation degree along with diploma/degree in computer 
application and further that a person holding graduation in 
Commerce and diploma/degree in Cooperative Management 
will be given preference. At the same time, as mentioned 
above, Proviso to Rule 19A contemplated about relaxation in 
the educational qualification to promote the employee on the 
post of Samiti Prabandhak on the basis of employees’ special 
experience/competence/seniority.
6.	
Recollecting at this stage the relevant facts, when the appellant was 
appointed as an Assistant Society Manager in the year 1987 by 
the Board of Directors of respondent No. 5-Society, the educational 
qualification necessary for the purpose of appointment to the Society 
Manager was Higher Secondary. This was as per the Rules in force 
at that time. From 30.08.2013 in the new Rules, the qualifications for 
the post of Society Manager were revised to requirement of graduation 
with diploma in computer, and it was further provided that the relaxation 
in such educational qualification could be granted by the Registrar to 
the employees who had been working for more than 5 years.
6.1	 In light of the appellant’s experience of work, his case was 
recommended for promotion to the post of Society Manager by 
the Board of Directors and was approved and furthered by the 
General Body. The Registrar, by order dated 07.06.2016, did 
not grant the relaxation in educational qualification, refusing the 
recommendation of the Board of Directors and the General Body.
6.2	 There is no gainsaying that at all material times, the power to 
grant relaxation was available and was vested with the Board 
of Directors. In the case of the appellant, it was the Board of 
Directors which passed the resolution granting the relaxation 
to the appellant, exercising the powers duly vested in it. The 
Registrar could not have disapproved the resolution, once it 
was validly passed by the Board of Directors, which was a 
competent authority exercising its powers.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
143
Kamal Prasad Dubey v. The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others
7.	
In the entire scenario, what becomes conspicuous is that during the 
same period, two other employees named Sushil Kumar Tripathi and 
Ram Swaroop Pandey were recommended for promotion by the Board 
of Directors of the society and that the Registrar accepted those 
recommendations by his order. Both the above employees named 
Sushil Kumar and Ram Swaroop possessed the same qualification 
of Higher Secondary as that of the appellant at the time they were 
approved by the Registrar to be promoted upon recommendation 
by the Board of Directors. 
7.1	 Sushil Kumar and Ram Swaroop could be grouped together 
to be the homogeneous class of persons to be approved for 
promotion, without inviting a breach of any law or statutory rule. 
The relaxation in educational qualification was permissible and 
the Board of Directors extended the same to the appellant in view 
of his long-standing service and work experience. The Registrar, 
in approving two other employees for promotion and negativing 
and discarding the case of the appellant though all the three 
cases were attended by similar circumstances, acted arbitrarily.
7.2	 It is not that said Sushil Kumar and Ram Swaroop were not 
eligible to be promoted and yet they were promoted. In the same 
way stands the case of the appellant who was also otherwise 
qualified and eligible, by extending the provision for relaxation in 
educational qualification, to be promoted to the post of Society 
Manager to sail in the same boat with the said two similarly 
situated employees. Thus, the case of the appellant is not one 
that the appellant seeks parity and equality for promotion with 
ineligibles or that he is not fit to be promoted. No concept of 
negative equality is attracted that the appellant is to be given 
equal treatment with those persons who are not eligible.
8.	
Learned Single Judge could rightly notice the equality aspect as 
observed thus, 
‘9. ...The respondents have also not denied the fact that 
other two persons namely Sushil Kumar Pandey and 
Ramswaroop Pandey, whose appointments have been 
placed on record as Annexure P-16 and P-17 have been 
given relaxation in their educational qualification. In view of 
the same this Court does not find any reason or justification 
to uphold the impugned order passed by the respondent 

144
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
No.2 as reproduced herein above which is cryptic in 
nature and does not disclose any reason for rejection of 
relaxation in petitioner’s educational qualification for the 
post of Society Manager as has been recommended by 
the respondent No.5 in their resolution. Thus on merits as 
also on the ground of parity, the petitioner is entitled for 
relaxation in his educational qualification for his promotion 
to the post of Society Manager.’
8.1	 Even as the discriminatory treatment writ large in case of the 
appellant, the Division Bench, for no good reason, did not 
approve the finding of the learned Single Judge regarding 
discrimination. It was observed in paragraph 11 of the impugned 
order by the Division Bench that since the appellant did not 
have the necessary qualification to be promoted, the Registrar, 
Cooperative Societies, was well within his powers in declining 
to grant the relaxation, overlooking the fact that the relaxation 
was permissible under the rules itself. 
8.2	 While on one hand, the Division Bench of the High Court in 
its impugned order recorded that the Registrar was within his 
jurisdiction to refuse the relaxation, it specifically observed in 
the previous paragraph 10 of the impugned order that at the 
relevant time, the discretion for granting relaxation was vested 
with the Board of Directors of the society and not with the 
Registrar. The reasoning in the impugned order amounted to 
a clear contradiction. 
9.	
While the Division Bench of the High Court in its impugned order 
misdirected itself in its approach and reasoning to reverse the 
judgment of Learned Single Judge for all the aforesaid facts, reasons 
and circumstances, the non-acceptance of the case of the appellant 
for promotion to the post of Society Manager, does not stand to 
reason, defies rationale, smothers reasonableness and does not 
hold good on merits. 
9.1	 The equal treatment came to be denied to the appellant to his 
discrimination. The facts obtained strikingly attract the tenets of 
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, to violate the fundamental 
concept of equality in law and equal treatment in the matters 
of employment. Substantive justice and real justice is always 
subserved by applying the doctrine of equality.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
145
Kamal Prasad Dubey v. The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others
9.2	 In the year 2019, new Rules came into force. The educational 
qualification for the post of Society Manager came to be reframed 
to be lowered again and the requirement was re-enacted to 
Higher Secondary with one-year diploma in computer education. 
Order dated 01.11.2019, whereby the aforesaid qualification was 
provided for, figures on record, having been produced by the 
appellant. It further contemplated that if the person concerned 
does not possess the computer-related qualification, he would 
be granted one-year period to acquire such qualification.
9.3	 It is to be noted that the appellant has attained the said 
qualification in the year 2020. The appellant now holds the 
degree of M.A. and has also successfully completed the diploma 
in computers.
10.	 In view of the foregoing reasons and discussion, the impugned 
order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh, Jabalpur is rendered unsustainable in law. Resultantly, 
order dated 11.11.2019 passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur in Writ Appeal No.1758 of 2019 
and order dated 17.12.2019 in Review Petition No.1665 of 2019, 
are hereby set aside. 
11.	 The Appeals stand allowed. 
In view of the disposal of the Appeals, the interlocutory applications, 
as may be pending, shall not survive.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
