[2026] 5 S.C.R. 119 : 2026 INSC 352
The State of Kerala  
v.  
M. Vijayakumar & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 4347-4348 of 2026)
10 April 2026
[Manoj Misra* and Prasanna B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
If Dearness Allowance (DA) and Dearness Relief (DR) are to be 
added on salary and pension payable to serving employees and 
retired employees, respectively, whether there could be a higher 
rate for enhancement of DA than what it is for DR.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.14 – Dearness Allowance and 
Dearness Relief – Retired employees of KSRTC filed a writ 
petition questioning the lower rate fixed for enhancement of 
DR on pension than what was fixed for enhancement of DA on 
salary – Their grievance was that the serving employees got 
enhancement of DA by 14 per cent whereas the pensioners’ 
DR was enhanced by 11 per cent – They claimed violation of 
Art.14 of the Constitution – The Single Judge of the High Court 
dismissed the writ petitions – However, the Division Bench of 
the High Court held that benefit extended was discriminatory 
and violative of Art.14 of the Constitution – Whether the High 
Court was justified in holding the same to be discriminatory 
and violative of Art.14:
Held: The object and purpose of dearness allowance/dearness relief 
is to mitigate the hardship faced by salaried employees/pensioners 
on account of inflation – The Government Order in question increases 
the rate of DA by 14% and DR by 11% even though the increase is 
to serve a common object, which is to mitigate the hardship faced 
by the serving employees and pensioners on account of inflation – 
Indisputably, inflation hits both serving and retired employees with 
equal force, therefore, differentiating the two qua the rate of increase 
of DA and DR, has no rational nexus to the object sought to be 
achieved – Therefore, the High Court was justified in holding the 
same to be discriminatory and violative of Article 14. [Paras 25, 26]
* Author

120
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Constitution of India – Art.14 – Test of reasonable classification – 
Burden of proof:
Held: Art.14 of the Constitution forbids class legislation but permits 
reasonable classification which must satisfy twin tests: (1) that the 
classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which 
distinguishes those that are grouped together from others, and (2) 
that differentia must have rational nexus with the object sought 
to be achieved by the Act – The differentia which is the basis 
of the classification and the object of the Act are distinct things 
and what is necessary is that there must be a nexus between 
the two – Legislative and executive action may accordingly be 
sustained if it satisfies the twin tests of reasonable classification 
and the rational principle correlated to the object sought to be 
achieved – The burden of proof lies on the State to affirmatively 
establish that these twin tests have been satisfied – The State 
must therefore not only establish the rational principle on which 
classification is founded but correlate it to the objects sought to 
be achieved. [Para 22]
Constitution of India – Art.14 – Concept of Equality – Equality 
is antithetic to arbitrariness – Discussed. [Para 22] 
Case Law Cited
Ajay Hasia and Others v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and Others [1981] 
2 SCR 79 : (1981) 1 SCC 722; State of Punjab & Ors. v. Davinder 
Singh & Ors. [2024] 8 SCR 1321 : (2025) 1 SCC 1 – relied on.
Kallakkurichi Taluk Retired Officials Association, Tamil Nadu and 
Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu [2013] 4 SCR 883 : (2013) 2 SCC 
772; State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar [1952] 1 SCR 
284 : (1952) 1 SCC 1; Budhan Choudhary & Others v. State of 
Bihar [1955] 1 SCR 1045 : (1954) 2 SCC 791; E.P. Royappa v. 
State of Tamil Nadu and Another [1974] 2 SCR 348 : (1974) 4 
SCC 3 – referred to.
The Managing Director of KSRTC v. M. Venugopalan Nair, 
W.A.  No.176/2014; : M. Venugopalan Nair vs. The Chairman 
and Managing Director, KSRTC, Writ Petition (C) No. 
13798/2012 – referred to.
T.N. Electricity Board v. R. Veerasamy & Ors. [1999] 2 SCR 221 : 
(1999) 3 SCC 414; State of Punjab and Ors. v. Amar Nath Goyal 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
121
The State of Kerala v. M. Vijayakumar & Ors.
and Ors. [2005] Supp. 2 SCR 549 : (2005) 6 SCC 754; State of 
Rajasthan and Anr. v. Amrit Lal Gandhi and Ors. [1997] 1 SCR 
121 : (1997) 2 SCC 342; Chairman & MD, Kerala SRTC v. K.O. 
Varghese and Ors. [2007] 8 SCR 164 : (2007) 8 SCC 231; Himachal 
Road Transport Corporation and Anr. v. Himachal Road Transport 
Corporation Retired Employees Union [2021] 2 SCR 104 : (2021) 
4 SCC 502 – held inapplicable.
List of Acts
Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Dearness Allowance; Dearness Relief; Arbitrary action; Object of 
Dearness allowance and Dearness relief; Burden of Proof; Twin 
tests of reasonable classification; Mitigate the hardship; Concept 
of Equality; Pensioners; Employees; Enhancement of DA/DR; 
Inflation; Inflationary pressures.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s).  
4347-4348 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 22.11.2022 of the High Court 
of Kerala at Ernakulam in WA Nos. 131 and 202 of 2022
With
Civil Appeal No. 4349 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
P.V. Dinesh, Jaideep Gupta, Sr. Advs., Deepak Prakash, Nachiketa 
Vajpayee, Ms. Divyangna Malik, Ms. Jyoti Pandey, Rahul Suresh, 
Ms. Shivangi Rajawat, Chetan Jadon, Ms. Anna Oommen, C. K. 
Sasi, Ms. Meena K Poulose, Riddhi Bose, Ms. Racheeta Chawla, 
Ms. Sampriti Bakshi, Siddharth Banerjee.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
V. Chitambaresh, Sr. Adv., Vipin Nair, Aditya Narendranath, Mohd 
Aman Alam, Ms. M. B. Ramya, Ms. Deeksha Gupta, C. K. Sasi, 
Ms. Meena K Poulose, Deepak Prakash.

122
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manoj Misra, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
These two appeals impugn a common judgment and order of the 
High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam1 dated 22.11.2022 passed in 
Writ Appeal Nos.131 and 202 of 2022 which arose from W.P. (C) 
No.12062 of 2021 and W.P. (C) No.6411 of 2021. As these appeals 
impugn a common judgment, they were heard together and are 
being decided by a common judgment.
ISSUE
3.	
The short question posited for our consideration in these appeals is: 
If dearness allowance2 and dearness relief3 are to be added on salary 
and pension payable to serving employees and retired employees, 
respectively, whether there could be a higher rate for enhancement 
of DA than what it is for DR?
FACTS
4.	
Retired employees of Kerala State Road Transport Corporation4 filed 
a writ petition questioning the lower rate fixed for enhancement of DR 
on pension than what was fixed for enhancement of DA on salary. 
Their grievance was that the serving employees got enhancement 
of DA by 14 per cent whereas the pensioners’ DR was enhanced by 
11 per cent. Claiming that there was no rationale for different rates, 
and the same violated the mandate of Article 145 of the Constitution 
of India6, writ petitions were filed before a Single Judge of the High 
Court.
1	
The High Court
2	
DA
3	
DR
4	
KSRTC
5	
Article 14. – The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal protection of the 
laws within the territory of India.
6	
Constitution

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
123
The State of Kerala v. M. Vijayakumar & Ors.
5.	
The learned Single Judge, vide order dated 14.12.2021, dismissed 
the writ petitions holding that serving employees and pensioners do 
not constitute one class, and therefore, different rates of enhancement 
are permissible. 
6.	
Aggrieved by the order of the learned Single Judge, intra court 
appeals were filed before a division bench of the High Court.
7.	
The Division Bench, after considering the submissions, formulated 
the following question for its consideration: 
“Whether, after having taken a decision to extend the 
benefits of the order of the State Government declaring the 
enhancement of DA/DR to its employees and pensioners, 
to the KSRTC and its employees and pensioners, the 
State Government/KSRTC could effect a classification 
between the employees and pensioners of KSRTC 
for the purposes of granting the DA/DR at differential  
rates?”
8.	
After considering several decisions of this Court, the High Court 
held as under:
“15. The principles that can be gleaned from the aforesaid 
decision, when applied in the context of the cases before 
us, compel us to hold that the action of the State and the 
KSRTC in restricting the benefit of enhancement of DR 
to the pensioners of KSRTC to 109 % with effect from 
March, 2021, while extending the benefit of enhanced DA 
to its employees @ 112 % with effect from March, 2021, 
is to be seen as discriminatory and violative of Article 
14 of our Constitution. It cannot be disputed that a valid 
classification must be justified vis-a-vis the object that is 
sought to be achieved through the measure that is adopted 
by the Government. In the cases before us, the object of 
extending an enhanced rate of DA/DR was essentially to 
balance the effects of ongoing inflation so as to ensure that 
the inflation does not interfere with the enjoyment of life 
to which an employee /pensioner is accustomed. Through 
the payment of the allowances in question, the objective 
aforesaid was to be attained, both in respect of employees 

124
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
as well as the pensioners. A restriction of the enhanced 
benefit to employees alone to the exclusion of pensioners 
on the specious plea of reasonable classification, appears 
to us to be violative of the equality clause enshrined in 
our Constitution. As already noticed, while it was open 
to the State Government / KSRTC to take into account 
the possible financial burden that would be fastened 
on them through the grant of enhanced DA/DR, while 
deciding whether or not to grant the said benefit to the 
employees / pensioners of KSRTC, once they decided 
to extend the benefit to the said employees/pensioners, 
there could not be discrimination between them in the 
course of implementation of the decision. It is trite that the 
question as to whether a classification is reasonable or 
not must necessarily be tested against the object sought 
to be achieved for which the classification is held. In the 
instant cases, and vis-a-vis the particular object that was 
sought to be achieved through the grant of enhanced 
DA/DR, we feel that a classification between employees 
and pensioners was not justified. Thus, we find ourselves 
unable to sustain the impugned judgment of the learned 
Single Judge. We set aside the same, and allow the Writ 
Appeals and the Writ Petitions, with consequential reliefs 
to the appellants herein.” 
9.	
Aggrieved by the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court, the 
State of Kerala and KSRTC have separately filed appeals before us.
10.	 We have heard Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel, for the 
State of Kerala; Mr. P.V. Dinesh, learned senior counsel, for KSRTC; 
and Mr. V. Chitambaresh, learned senior counsel, for the retired 
employees (respondents).
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE 
11.	 On behalf of the State, it was submitted that retired employees and 
serving employees constitute different classes. Therefore, different 
rates for DA /DR qua two separate classes do not violate the right 
to equality as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution. Besides, 
financial reasons alone can justify different rates for two separate 
classes.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
125
The State of Kerala v. M. Vijayakumar & Ors.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF KSRTC
12.	 Learned counsel representing KSRTC adopted the submissions 
made on behalf of the State of Kerala and added that KSRTC is 
facing a resource crunch, therefore, considering its financial health, 
a conscious decision was taken to provide dearness relief to the 
pensioners at a rate lesser than the one at which dearness allowance 
is to be provided to the serving employees.
DECISIONS CITED ON BEHALF OF APPELLANT(S)
13.	 In support of their submissions, the learned counsel for the State 
and KSRTC have cited following decisions:	
i.	
T.N. Electricity Board vs. R. Veerasamy & Ors7. Therein the 
question that arose for consideration was “whether the appellant 
Board acted illegally or contrary to law in introducing the pension 
scheme to the employees, who were hitherto not governed by 
such pension scheme, prospectively from 01.07.1986. That is, 
whether the employees who retired before 01.07.1986 after 
receiving all retiral benefits available to them as per the law 
existing on their dates of retirement, can compel the appellant/
Board to extend the benefit of newly introduced pension scheme 
with retrospective effect”. Upholding the Board’s decision, this 
court held that the employees who retired before 01.07.1986 
cannot compel the appellant/Board to extend the benefit of the 
newly introduced pension scheme with retrospective effect. 
While holding so, this Court accepted the explanation of the 
Board that there were financial constraints in making the scheme 
applicable to all.
ii.	
State of Punjab and Ors. vs Amar Nath Goyal and Ors.8 
Therein the Government took a decision that those who retired 
or died on or after 01.04.1995 were entitled to get retirement 
gratuity/ death gratuity on the basis of addition of certain portion 
of the dearness allowance to the basic pay. The employees 
who retired prior to 01.04.1995, being deprived of its benefits, 
laid a challenge to such deprivation. Negativing the challenge, 
7	
(1999) 3 SCC 414
8	
(2005) 6 SCC 754

126
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
this Court held that financial and economic implications are 
very relevant and germane for any policy decision touching 
the administration of the Government. Therefore, the decision 
of the Government, after assessing the financial implications 
thereof, to limit the benefits only to employees who retired, or 
died, on or after 01.04.1995, was neither irrational nor arbitrary.
iii.	
State of Rajasthan and Anr. vs. Amrit Lal Gandhi and Ors.9 
Therein the validity of the cut-off date from which the pension 
scheme was made applicable was under challenge. As per the 
decision of the Government, the scheme was made applicable 
with effect from 01.01.1990. The challenge laid to the said cut-off 
date was accepted by the High Court and a direction was issued 
to make it applicable from 01.01.1986 as the recommendations 
were forwarded in 1986. This Court set aside the order of the 
High Court holding that recommendations made in 1986 did not 
contain a specific date with effect from which the pension scheme 
was to be made applicable. Moreover, the recommendations 
were subject to approval. Additionally, the Court accepted the 
explanation of the State that the decision for the cut-off date of 
01.01.1990 was “wholly economic”. Besides, it was observed 
that “financial impact of making the regulations retrospective 
can be the sole consideration while fixing a cut-off date.” 
iv.	
Chairman & MD, Kerala SRTC vs. K.O. Varghese and Ors.10 
In this case, the issue was regarding the decision to defer 
release of the benefits of 5th Pay Commission to the pensioners 
of KSRTC. The Government of Kerala had authorized KSRTC 
to pay pension to its employees as per the Kerala Service 
Rules. Pursuant thereto, KSRTC took a decision to pay pension 
to all those employees who retired after 01.04.1984, subject 
to fulfilling certain conditions. When 5th Pay Commission 
recommendations were accepted by the State Government, due 
to precarious financial position of KSRTC, a decision was taken 
to implement only some of the recommendations with effect from 
01.11.1986. Further, the implementation of the recommendations 
of 5th Pay Commission relating to pension and allied matters 
9	
(1997) 2 SCC 342
10	
(2007) 8 SCC 231

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
127
The State of Kerala v. M. Vijayakumar & Ors.
was deferred. Some of the employees of KSRTC filed a writ 
petition in the High Court challenging non-implementation of 
the recommendations. Those writ petitions were disposed of 
with direction to the Government to take a policy decision on 
whether the benefits of 5th Pay Commission recommendations 
should be extended to the pensioners of KSRTC. Pursuant 
thereto, a decision was taken by the State Government deferring 
the implementation of the recommendations for better times. 
The matter ultimately came to this Court. This Court held that 
KSRTC is an autonomous corporation established under the 
Road Transport Corporations Act, 1950. It can regulate the 
service conditions of its employees by making appropriate 
regulations in that behalf. Until such regulations are framed, it is 
entitled to take note of its financial health in considering whether 
a particular recommendation for enhanced pay or pension in 
respect of government employees should be adopted by it, and 
if it is to be adopted by it, from what point of time. Additionally, 
it was observed that financial condition of a corporation like 
KSRTC is a relevant factor. Consequently, this Court upheld 
the decision of KSRTC to defer the implementation of 5th Pay 
Commission recommendations. 
v.	
Himachal Road Transport Corporation and Anr. vs. Himachal 
Road Transport Corporation Retired Employees Union11. 
Therein, this Court held that employees who were governed 
by CPF scheme and retired prior to 05.06.1995 by availing 
benefit of the scheme and employees who were in service and 
continued after 05.06.1995 cannot be treated as a homogenous 
class. Besides, fixing the cut-off date is an executive function 
based on several factors like economic conditions, financial 
constraints, administrative and other circumstances. This Court 
also observed that it is always open for the employer to introduce 
new schemes and benefits, having regard to financial health of 
the employer. It was further observed that whenever such new 
benefit is extended for the existing employees, retired employees 
cannot seek such benefit merely on the ground that they too 
were the former employees of the Corporation. 
11	
(2021) 4 SCC 502

128
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
14.	 By relying on the aforesaid decisions, it was contended that serving 
and retired employees cannot be equated and financial decisions 
are not amenable to challenge, as the employer is the best judge of 
which scheme is to be brought and implemented, and to what extent. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RETIRED EMPLOYEES/
RESPONDENTS
15.	 On behalf of the pensioners, it was submitted that this is not a case 
where eligibility to pension or dearness relief is in issue. The State 
Government has authorized KSRTC to give pensionary benefits to 
its employees. Pursuant thereto, KSRTC has taken a conscious 
decision to pay pension to its employees. Therefore, there is no 
doubt regarding eligibility to pension, and there is no dispute that 
DR, which is linked to inflation, is payable to pensioners. However, 
the issue is whether DR could be enhanced at a rate lower than at 
which DA is enhanced for the serving employees. In that context, 
it is submitted that the object of DA as well as DR is to ensure that 
serving employees / pensioners do not suffer on account of inflation. 
But since inflation is common for both serving and non-serving/ 
retired employees, there is no rationale for differential rates. Hence, 
the High Court’s decision does not warrant any interference. 
16.	 In support of his submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioner 
relied on: 
(i)	
Kallakkurichi Taluk Retired Officials Association, Tamil 
Nadu and Ors. vs. State of Tamil Nadu.12 In this case, it was 
observed that the object of extending DA and Dearness Pay, 
which is equivalent to DR, to employees / retired employees is 
to balance the effects of ongoing inflation. Since the component 
of inflation similarly affects all employees and all pensioners 
irrespective of the date of their entry into service or retirement, 
it is not per se possible to accept different levels of dearness 
pay to remedy the malady of inflation.
(ii)	
Kerala High Court judgment in Writ Petition (C) No.13798/2012: 
M. Venugopalan Nair vs. The Chairman and Managing 
Director, KSRTC, dated 03.07.2013. Therein it was held as 
follows: 
12	
(2013) 2 SCC 772

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
129
The State of Kerala v. M. Vijayakumar & Ors.
“Learned Standing Counsel contended that the 
serving employees and retired employees are two 
different and distinct classes. Once KSRTC takes a 
decision to disburse such benefits to distinct classes 
on different dates, no discrimination can be attributed, 
is the contention. It is to be accepted that serving 
employees and pensioners fall within two distinct and 
different categories. But question to be considered 
is as to whether the decision for giving benefits on 
different dates among those categories is justified or 
not. When it comes to the question of sustainability 
or justification of such decision, the objective has to 
be looked into. Merely because they fall within two 
categories, there cannot have different yardsticks 
in the matter of payment of benefits. Once KSRTC 
takes a decision to implement the revision of D.A., 
the same should have been uniformly applied. Unless 
there is any nexus with any objective sought to be 
achieved, no justifiable reasoning can be there for 
the differentiation among the two categories, and 
in such situation, it will amount to discrimination. 
Therefore, I am of the view that there is justification in 
the claim made by the petitioner seeking declaration 
for uniform treatment.”
(iii)	 Division bench decision of the Kerala High Court in W.A. 
No. 176/2014: The Managing Director of KSRTC vs. M. 
Venugopalan Nair, dated 09.02.2017. In this case, the High 
Court had observed: 
“Though serving employees and pensioners fall 
under two distinct and different categories, there 
cannot be different yardsticks in the matter of 
payment of benefits on revision of DA. Once the 
appellant corporation takes a decision to implement 
the revision of DA the same should have been 
uniformly applied. Unless there is any nexus with 
any objective sought to be achieved, no justifiable 
reasoning can be there for the differentiation among 
the two categories, and in such situation, it will 
amount to discrimination.”

130
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
17.	 Relying on the above decisions, the learned counsel for the 
respondents submitted that as KSTRC had taken a decision to 
provide DR to meet inflationary pressure, there was no justification 
to have a different rate for increase of DR than what it is for DA, 
when the inflation index is common.
REJOINDER SUBMISSIONS
18.	 In his rejoinder submission, learned counsel for the State invited our 
attention to paragraph 37 of the judgment in Kallakkurichi Taluk 
(supra), wherein it was observed as follows: -
“37. The issue in hand needs to be examined from another 
perspective as well. It must be clearly understood that no 
employee has a right to draw “dearness allowance” as 
“dearness pay” till such time as the State Government 
decides to treat “dearness allowance” as “dearness pay”. 
And therefore, the State Government has the right to 
choose whether or not “dearness allowance” should be 
treated as “dearness pay”. As such, it is open to the State 
Government not to treat any part of “dearness allowance” as 
“dearness pay”. In case of financial constraints, this would 
be the most appropriate course to be adopted. Likewise, 
the State Government has the right to choose how much 
of “dearness allowance” should be treated as “dearness 
pay”. As such, it is open to the State Government to treat 
a fraction, or even the whole of “dearness allowance” as 
“dearness pay”. Based on Rule 30 of the Pension Rules, 
it is clear that the component of “dearness pay” would 
be added to emoluments of an employee for calculating 
pension. In a situation where the State Government 
has chosen, that a particular component of “dearness 
allowance” would be treated as “dearness pay”, it cannot 
discriminate between one set of pensioners and another, 
while calculating the pension payable to them (for the 
reasons expressed in the preceding paragraphs). Of 
course, a valid classification may justify such an action. 
In this case, the State Government has not come out with 
any justification/basis for the classification whereby one 
set of pensioners has been distinguished from others for 
differential treatment.”

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
131
The State of Kerala v. M. Vijayakumar & Ors.
19.	 We have considered the rival submissions and have perused the 
materials on record.
DISCUSSION
20.	 Before we dwell on the question framed above, it would be apposite 
to have a glimpse at the undisputed facts. There is no dispute inter 
se parties that the State of Kerala, vide G.O. (Rt) No.98/2021/TRANS 
dt. 25.02.2021, to meet inflationary pressures had sanctioned a 
certain sum of money, by way of temporary relief, while enhancing 
DA to 112% (an increase of 14%) for KSRTC employees and DR 
to 109% (an increase of 11%) for pensioners, effective March 2021. 
Thus, what is clear is that DR is payable to pensioners of KSRTC 
and the same is to be increased from time to time. The issue is that 
why should DR be raised at 11% when DA has been raised at 14%, 
when both are linked to inflation index. 
21.	 DA is paid to serving employees whereas DR is paid to pensioners. 
The object of both DA and DR is common, which is to enable the 
serving employees /pensioners meet the exigencies of inflation. As 
the object of both DR/ DA is common, which is to meet inflationary 
pressures, and the inflation index is common to both the serving and 
the non-serving/ retired employees, qua the measure, that is, the 
rate(s) of increase of DA/ DR, could serving and retired employees 
be differentiated, is the issue which we shall address.
22.	 Article 14 of the Constitution forbids class legislation but permits 
reasonable classification which must satisfy twin tests: (1) that the 
classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which 
distinguishes those that are grouped together from others, and (2) 
that differentia must have rational nexus with the object sought to 
be achieved by the Act – The differentia which is the basis of the 
classification and the object of the Act are distinct things and what 
is necessary is that there must be a nexus between the two.13 
Legislative and executive action may accordingly be sustained if it 
satisfies the twin tests of reasonable classification and the rational 
principle correlated to the object sought to be achieved. The burden 
of proof lies on the State to affirmatively establish that these twin tests 
13	
See: (1952) 1 SCC 1 : 1952 SCC OnLine SC 1 : State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar; (1954) 2 SCC 
791 : 1954 SCC OnLine SC 19 : Bhudhan Choudhary & Others v. State of Bihar

132
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
have been satisfied. The State must therefore not only establish the 
rational principle on which classification is founded but correlate it to 
the objects sought to be achieved14. Besides, equality is a dynamic 
concept with many aspects and dimensions, and it cannot be cribbed, 
cabined and confined within traditional and doctrinaire limits. From a 
positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact, 
equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the rule 
of law in a republic while the other, to the whim and caprice of an 
absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it 
is unequal both according to political logic and constitutional law and 
is therefore violative of Article 14, and if it affects any matter relating 
to public employment, it is also violative of Article 16. Articles 14 and 
16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and ensure fairness and 
equality of treatment. They require that State action must be based 
on valid relevant principles applicable alike to all similar situate and 
it must not be guided by any extraneous or irrelevant considerations 
because that would be denial of equality15.
23.	 In Ajay Hasia and others v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and others16, 
this Court observed that doctrine of classification is the judicial 
formula for determining whether the legislative or executive action 
in question is arbitrary and therefore constituting denial of equality. 
If the classification is not reasonable and does not satisfy the two 
conditions referred to above, the impugned legislative or executive 
action would plainly be arbitrary and the guarantee of equality 
under Article 14 would be breached. Wherever therefore there is 
arbitrariness in State action whether it be of the legislature or of the 
executive or of an authority under Article 12, Article 14 immediately 
springs into action and strikes down such State action.
24.	 In State of Punjab & Ors. v. Davinder Singh & Ors17, Dr. D.Y. 
Chandrachud, C.J. (as His Lordship then was), while explaining the 
contours of Article 14, wrote:
“85. The Constitution permits valid classification if two 
conditions are fulfilled. First, there must be an intelligible 
14	
(1983) 1 SCC 305 : D.S. Nakara & Others v. Union of India, paragraphs 15 and 16
15	
(1974) 4 SCC 3 : E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu and Another, paragraph 85.
16	
(1981) 1 SCC 722, paragraph 16
17	
(2025) 1 SCC 1

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
133
The State of Kerala v. M. Vijayakumar & Ors.
differentia which distinguishes persons grouped together 
from others left out of the group. The phrase “intelligible 
differentia” means difference capable of being understood. 
The difference is capable of being understood when 
there is a yardstick to differentiate the class included and 
others excluded from the group. In the absence of the 
yardstick, the differentiation would be without a basis and 
hence, unreasonable. The basis of classification must be 
deducible from the provisions of the statute; surrounding 
circumstances or matters of common knowledge. In making 
the classification, the State is free to recognize degrees of 
harm. Though the classification need not be mathematical 
in precision, there must be some difference between 
the persons grouped and the persons left out, and the 
difference must be real and pertinent. The classification 
is unreasonable if there is little or no difference. Second, 
the differentia must have a rational relation to the object 
sought to be achieved by the law, that is, the basis of 
classification must have a nexus with the object of the 
classification”.
(Emphasis supplied)
25.	 Now, applying the twin-tests principle, we shall test the validity of the 
Government Order to the extent it provides a lower rate of increase for 
DR than what it provides for DA. The object and purpose of dearness 
allowance/dearness relief is to mitigate the hardship faced by salaried 
employees/pensioners on account of inflation. The Government 
Order in question increases the rate of DA by 14% and DR by 11% 
even though the increase is to serve a common object, which is to 
mitigate the hardship faced by the serving employees and pensioners 
on account of inflation. Indisputably, inflation hits both serving and 
retired employees with equal force, therefore, differentiating the two 
qua the rate of increase of DA and DR, in our view, has no rational 
nexus to the object sought to be achieved. 
26.	 The issue here is not about entitlement to DR on pension. Therefore, in 
our view, the decisions cited by the learned counsel for the appellants 
are not applicable on the facts of the case on hand. Besides, once 
pension is admissible and, based on inflation, DR is admissible on 
it, announcing DR at a rate lower than at what DA is provided, when 

134
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
both are linked to inflation and serve a common object, would be 
nothing but discriminatory as well as arbitrary. Therefore, in our view, 
the High Court was justified in holding the same to be discriminatory 
and violative of Article 14. 
27.	 The decisions cited by the learned counsel for the State as well 
as KSRTC do not deal with a situation where there is no dispute 
as regards entitlement to the benefit in question. Here, the retired 
employees are not only entitled to pension but also dearness relief, 
which is revisable from time to time, based on inflation. Thus, the 
issue is not of entitlement to the benefit but of differential rates at 
which those benefits are provided, dependent on whether the recipient 
is a serving or a retired employee. In our view, when those benefits 
serve a common purpose and are linked to inflation, and inflationary 
pressures do not discriminate between a serving employee and a 
pensioner, fixing different rates of enhancement of dearness allowance 
and dearness relief have no rational nexus to the object sought to 
be achieved and is clearly discriminatory as well as arbitrary. 
28.	 No doubt a financial crunch might be a guiding factor to defer 
disbursement of certain benefits or may justify separate dates for 
implementation of beneficial schemes. But once a decision is taken 
to provide certain allowances as also to increase them, based on 
inflation, fixing a higher rate of increase for the ones who are serving 
than the ones who have retired, would be arbitrary and violative 
of Article 14 of the Constitution. The question posited above, is 
answered accordingly.
29.	 As a result, we do not find any merit in these appeals. The same 
are accordingly dismissed. Pending application (s), if any, shall stand 
disposed of. There is no order as to costs.
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
