[2026] 5 S.C.R. 67 : 2026 INSC 332
Hem Raj 
v. 
The State of Himachal Pradesh
(Criminal Appeal No. 1833 of 2026)
08 April 2026
[Prashant Kumar Mishra and N.V. Anjaria,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
(i) What is contended by the appellant is that punishment imposed 
u/s.20 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 
on the appellant would take care of the punishment for the conviction 
u/s.25 and s.29 of the Act, which according to the appellant, are 
only part of substantive offence. Given the legislative mandate, 
whether the said contention has to be negatived; (ii) Whether the 
fine imposed separately as part of the punishment of two offences 
would be liable to be treated concurrent along with the sentences 
of imprisonment.
Headnotes†
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 – 
ss.20(b)(ii)(c), 25, 29 – Prosecution case that a blue coloured 
carry bag containing charas of the quantity of 4 kgs.100 gms 
was found in possession of two accused persons including 
appellant herein – Both the accused including the appellant 
came to be convicted for commission of offence punishable 
u/ss.20(b)(ii)(C) and 25 r/w. s.29 of NDPS Act – Special Judge 
by the order dated 16.11.2019 sentenced both the convicts to 
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 12 years each 
and to pay fine of Rs.1,20,000/- each and in default of payment 
of the amount of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment 
for a period of one year each for the commission of offence 
punishable u/s.20(b)(ii)(C) of the NDPS Act – In respect of 
offence punishable u/s.25 r/w. s.29 of the NDPS Act, the 
appellant and the co-convict were sentenced to undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for a period of 12 years each and to 
pay fine of Rs.1,20,000/- each and in default of payment of fine, 
to undergo rigorous imprisonment of further period of one 
* Author

68
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
year each – It was directed that both the sentences shall run 
concurrently – What is contended is that punishment imposed 
u/s.20 on the appellant would take care of the punishment for 
the conviction u/s.25 and s.29 of the Act, which according to the 
appellant, are only part of substantive offence – Correctness:
Held: Reading ss.15 to 19, 21 to 24, 25A, 27 as well as s.20 which 
is relevant to the present case, it would be noticed that all these 
sections prescribed punishment and sentence separately for the 
offence related to contraband mentioned therein – s.25 however 
says that a person who is found to be owner or occupier or having 
the control or use of any house, room, enclosure, space, place, 
animal or conveyance, is found to be knowingly permitting it to 
be used for the commission by any other person of an offence 
punishable under any provision of this Act shall be punishable with 
“the punishment provided for that offence” – Similar phraseology 
is employed in respect of punishment in s.29 which says that 
a person found guilty of abetment and criminal conspiracy to 
commit an offence under Chapter IV “be punishable with the 
punishment provided for the offence”, notwithstanding anything 
contained in s.116 of the IPC – Various sections in Chapter IV 
of the Act relate to different independent offences pertaining to 
the contraband – s.25 and s.29, which are part of the group of 
sections, also speak of the offences – Allowing premises etc. to be 
used for commission of an offence is conceived by the legislature 
to be a separate offence and engrafted in the Act accordingly 
as an independent offence u/s.25 – Criminal conspiracy, which 
is an independent offence, is so incorporated in s.29 of the 
NDPS Act – Given the legislative mandate, the contention has 
to be negatived that no separate punishment and sentence is 
contemplated in respect of s.25 and s.29 of the Act – When the 
offence u/s.25 is entirely possible to be committed separately as 
an independent offence to remain distinct in itself, and when the 
offences of abetment and criminal conspiracy mentioned in s.29 
are in themselves independent offences, it is entirely logical to 
deduce and conclude that commission of these offences once 
established, would attract separate punishment and sentence – 
It may happen in large number of cases that offences u/ss.25 
and 29, as the case may be, take place along with the other 
substantive offences mentioned in Chapter IV, in course of the 
same transaction – The two offences may be part of an inclusive 
transaction – In other words, though separately punishable, the 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
69
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
offences u/ss.25 and 29 could be parasitic and derivative – The 
conviction is possible for two offences which may be inclusive 
or interdependent arising out of same course of action or the 
transaction – Even while imposing separate punishment for such 
different offences, it would be the rule of wisdom to be followed 
by the court that in such cases, the sentence is made to run 
concurrently. [Paras 5.3, 5.6, 5.8.2, 6, 7.2, 8, 8.1]
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 – 
ss.20(b)(ii)(c), 25, 29 – Penal Code, 1860 – s.53 – Appellant 
submitted that due to his poor condition, he is not in a position 
to pay the fine – Whether the fine imposed separately as part 
of the punishment of two offences would be liable to be treated 
concurrent along with the sentences of imprisonment:
Held: In the present case, the appellant is sentenced by the 
High Court to undergo 10 years rigorous imprisonment, and to 
pay fine of ₹1,20,000/- and in default to undergo further rigorous 
imprisonment for one year – This is a default imprisonment – What 
it implies is that although the default imprisonment clause is taken 
out of the concept of sentence and is treated as penalty for not 
observing sentence of fine, the amount of fine imposed required 
to be paid by the convict is a sentence and has to be treated as 
part of sentence – s.53, IPC mentioned above also includes fine 
as a punishment to be part of sentence – In that view when the 
sentence is directed to run concurrently, the appellant cannot be 
made to pay fine twice – It is not in dispute that the appellant 
has undergone total 11 years of imprisonment till January 2026, 
which includes the default imprisonment – Since the appellant has 
suffered the default imprisonment also and that he is not required 
to pay double amount of fine, he is entitled to be released from 
the jail. [Paras 9.2, 9.3, 10]
Case Law Cited
Shahejadkhan Mahebubkhan Pathan v. State of Gujarat [2012] 8 
SCR 1177 : (2013) 1 SCC 570; Shantilal v. State of M.P. [2007] 10 
SCR 727 : (2007) 11 SCC 243; Gurdev Singh v. State of Punjab 
[2021] 4 SCR 439 : (2021) 6 SCC 558; Gurdeep Singh v. State 
of Punjab (2025) SCC OnLine SC 1669; State (NCT of Delhi) v. 
Navjot Sandhu [2005] Supp. 2 SCR 79 : (2005) 11 SCC 600; Noor 
Mohammad Mohd. Yusuf Momin v. State of Maharashtra [1971] 
1 SCR 119 : (1970) 1 SCC 696 – referred to.

70
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Narcotic 
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
List of Keywords
Section 20(b)(ii)(C), NDPS Act; Section 25, NDPS Act; Section 
29, NDPS Act; Same Transaction; Concurrent Sentences; Double 
Punishment; Doctrine of Reference; Default Imprisonment; 
Commercial Quantity; Independent Offenses; No Double Fine; 
Penalty; Sentence.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1833 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.12.2023 of the High Court 
of Himachal Pradesh at Shimla in CRA No. 93 of 2020.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ajay Marwah, Swaroop Anad Mishra, Mrigank Bhardwaj, Ms. Dhriti 
Sharma, Rahul Kumar.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
D K Thakur, Rohit Kumar, Bimlesh Kumar Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
N.V. Anjaria, J.
Leave granted. 
2.	
The present appeal is directed against common judgment and order 
dated 05.12.2023 passed by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh 
in Criminal Appeal No. 93 of 2020 and Criminal Appeal No. 230 of 
2020, in so far as the decision relates to Criminal Appeal No. 93 of 
2020, which was the appeal preferred by the appellant herein. 
2.1.	 The High Court partly allowed the appeal by modifying the 
sentence part of the judgment of learned Special Judge by 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
71
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
reducing the substantive sentence of the appellant to 10 years of 
rigorous imprisonment from 12 years of rigorous imprisonment, 
separately imposed for the offences under Section 20(b)(ii)(C) 
and also under Sections 25 and 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 19851. Rest of the sentence 
awarded by the Special Judge remained unaffected.
2.2.	 The Court of learned Special Judge, Chamba Division, Chamba 
(H.P.) decided Sessions Trial No. 8 of 2015 (NDPS Act) by its 
judgment dated 07.11.2019 against the present appellant Hem 
Raj, son of Shri Devi Singh and co-accused Kulwant, son of Shri 
Bhagwant. Both the accused including the appellant herein came 
to be convicted for commission of offence punishable under 
Sections 20(b)(ii)(C) and 25 read with Section 29 of NDPS Act. 
2.2.1.	 After hearing the convicts on the quantum of sentence, 
learned Special Judge by the order dated 16.11.2019 
sentenced both the convicts to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of 12 years each and to pay 
fine of Rs. 1,20,000/- each and in default of payment of 
the amount of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 
a period of one year each for the commission of offence 
punishable under Section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the NDPS Act. 
2.2.2.	 In respect of offence punishable under Section 25 read 
with Section 29 of the NDPS Act, the appellant and 
the co-convict were sentenced to undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of 12 years each and to pay 
a fine of Rs. 1,20,000/- each and in default of payment 
of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment of further 
period of one year each. 
2.2.3.	 It was directed that both the sentences shall run 
concurrently. In the appeal preferred by appellant 
Hem Raj before the High Court as stated above, the 
sentence came to be reduced to 10 years from 12 
years of rigorous imprisonment. The remainder part of 
the sentence stood confirmed as awarded by learned 
Special Judge.
1	
Hereinafter, “NDPS Act”.

72
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2.3.	 As noted by this Court in order dated 28.11.2025, the assail 
to the judgment and order of the High Court in this appeal is 
on two grounds. Firstly, that the appellant could not have been 
convicted separately for offence punishable under Section 
20(b)(ii)(C) on one hand and Sections 25 and 29 of the NDPS 
Act on the other. Second ground has been that the fine sentence 
could not have been imposed separately for both the offences 
and that since the sentences were ordered to run concurrently, 
the appellant is not required to pay the double amount of fine. 
3.	
Noticing the facts, on 22.12.2014, the police squad was exercising 
Nakabandi duty at Tunnuhatti Police Barrier in wee hours. At around 
3.50 a.m., while checking the vehicles, a grey coloured Esteem car 
bearing registration No. PB-65A-9377 was seen coming from the 
side of Banikhet. The police party stopped the car for checking. The 
driver revealed his name to be Kulwant Singh who was also the 
registered owner of the car, and the appellant Hem Raj sitting on 
the front seat, were the two occupying the car. When driver Kulwant 
Singh opened the window glass, the smell of cannabis spread out. 
3.1.	 Upon search of the said two persons and the vehicle, a blue 
coloured carry bag having transparent polythene packets 
containing black hard substance was found kept below the leg 
space of the front seat occupied by the appellant herein. The 
said blue coloured bag had in it eight transparent polythene 
packets containing black substance in round and stick shape. 
When it was checked with the drugs detection kit, the same 
was found to be charas of the quantity of 4 kgs.100 gms. 
3.2.	 After undertaking the necessary procedure both the accused 
were nabbed and were charged with the offence punishable 
under Sections 20(b)(ii)(C) and 25 read with Section 29 of the 
NDPS Act in the chargesheet filed on 14.08.2015.
4.	
Learned Counsel for the appellant Mr. Ajay Marwah while not 
challenging the conviction, highlighting the limited yet substantial 
challenge to the sentence imposed, submitted that the courts below 
were not justified in imposing separate punishments for the offences 
under Section 20 as well as under Section 25 read with Section 
29 of the NDPS Act, despite the fact that both the convictions 
arose from one indivisible transaction. Learned counsel took the 
court through Sections 20, 25 and 29 of the Act to pinpoint that no 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
73
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
separate punishment was provided under Section 25 and Section 
29 of the Act. 
4.1.	 It was additionally submitted that as borne out from chargesheet, 
the registered owner of the vehicle was co-accused Kulwant 
Singh and not the appellant herein, therefore, it was submitted, 
in absence of ownership, the ‘occupation’ and ‘control’ over the 
vehicle was not of the appellant and that he could not have 
“knowingly permitted its use” . On such basis it was sought to 
be submitted that the very foundation of invoking Section 25 of 
the Act against the appellant was lacking and that the appellant 
could not have been convicted under Section 25.
4.1.1.	 It was next submitted without prejudice that even if 
the appellant could be booked for the offence under 
Sections 25 and 29, the said provision does not prescribe 
an independent punishment or sentence. According 
to the learned counsel for the appellant, the offences 
contemplated under these Sections are merely in the 
nature of extension of the main offence in the nature 
of commission of supplemented act creating vicarious 
liability with the principal offence, which was under 
Section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the Act. It was submitted that the 
sentence awarded to the appellant amounted to double 
punishment which is prohibited under Section 71 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 18602 as well.
4.1.2.	 It was the next submission on behalf of the appellant 
that when the sentences for the said offences were 
directed to run concurrently, the entire punishment 
including the fine should have a concurrent operation. 
In this regard it was submitted that ‘punishments’ under 
Section 53, IPC includes both imprisonment and fine, 
therefore, treating imprisonment to be concurrent but 
treating the fine as cumulative would be illogical and 
would not be permissible. 
4.1.3.	 Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that due 
to poor condition, the appellant is not in a position to 
2	
Hereinafter, “IPC”.

74
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
pay the fine. It was submitted that till January 2026, the 
appellant has already suffered incarceration for about 
11 years including the remission, as indicated in the 
custody certificate.
4.2.	 On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent State 
Mr. Bimlesh Kumar Singh refuted the arguments advanced on 
behalf of the appellant to submit that FIR No. 140 of 2014 dated 
22.12.2014 was registered against the appellant and the co-
convict which was for the offences punishable under Sections 
20, 25 and 29 of the NDPS Act for possessing, transporting and 
commissioning the crime with criminal conspiracy, to have in the 
car below the front driver seat 4 kgs and 100 gms of Charas 
and that both the persons came to be convicted for the said 
offence, the appellant having not challenged the said conviction. 
4.2.1.	 It was submitted that the High Court considering the 
aspect that appellant had already undergone 9 years of 
imprisonment and further that there was no complaint 
in the jail conduct of the appellant, the substantive 
sentence came to be reduced to 10 years from 12 years 
for the offences committed under Section 20 as well as 
25 and 29 of the Act. 
4.2.2.	 Learned counsel for the respondent further submitted 
that the sentence prescribed under Section 20(b)(ii)(C) is 
of rigorous imprisonment of not less than 10 years which 
may extend to 20 years and fine to be not less than Rs. 
1 lakh extendable to Rs. 2 lakh. It was highlighted that 
the commercial quantity of Charas was found to be in 
possession of the accused persons which was proved 
in the trial leading to conviction under Section 20(b)(ii)
(C) of the Act. The car was used for transportation of 
narcotics, submitted learned counsel for the respondent, 
the offence attracted Section 25 read with Section 29, 
which provisions prescribed for awarding same sentence 
as of the main offence. 
4.2.3.	 It was emphasised that the appellant was “occupier” 
of the car from whom the contraband was found and 
recovered and both acted in criminal conspiracy as held 
by the courts below. It was submitted that therefore the 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
75
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
conviction and imposition of sentence under the said 
sections separately done is justified. Learned counsel 
for the respondent submitted that there is no error in 
imposition of separate fine amounts which is part of 
sentence.
4.2.4.	 Learned counsel for the respondent also submitted that 
the sentence awarded is in consonance with the provision 
of the Section 65 of the IPC which provides that the term 
for which the court may direct the offender to be in prison 
in default of payment of fine shall not exceed up to 1/4th 
of the term of imprisonment which is the imprisonment 
maximum fixed for the offence if the offence is punishable 
with imprisonment as well as with fine. 
4.2.5.	 By relying on the decision of this Court in Shahejadkhan 
Mahebubkhan Pathan v. State of Gujarat3, it was 
submitted by learned counsel for the respondent that 
the term of imprisonment in default of payment of fine is 
not a sentence, but it is a penalty which a person incurs 
on account of non-payment of fine. Same principle was 
sought to be highlighted from another decision of this 
Court in Shantilal v. State of M.P.4 It was submitted 
that the minimum sentence prescribed is 10 years of 
rigorous imprisonment, therefore no option is available 
but to impose such minimum sentence in the list, which 
is done by the High Court. 
4.2.6.	 Learned counsel for the respondent proceeded to 
submit about deleterious impact of narcotic drugs and 
the activities in dealing with the narcotic drugs on the 
society and that how the menace of drug addiction has 
the tendency of destroying the life of an individual and 
the derailing the quality of the society to have the effect 
on the generations to come, by pressing into service 
the observation of this Court in Gurdev Singh v. State 
of Punjab5. 
3	
(2013) 1 SCC 570
4	
(2007) 11 SCC 243
5	
(2021) 6 SCC 558

76
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
5.	
In order to find an answer as to whether separate sentence for the 
offence under Section 20 on one hand and, on the other hand, for the 
offences committed under Sections 25 and 29 of the Act is permissible 
to be awarded and whether offences under Sections 25 and 29 
could be considered as part of the main offence under Section 20, 
and therefore not attracting separate punishment and sentence, it is 
necessary to consider various provisions in Chapter IV of the NDPS 
Act 1985, titled as “Offences and Penalties”. In different Sections, 
the punishment for contravention of different kinds of contrabands 
prohibited under the Act is considered. 
5.1.	 Section 15 of the Act is about punishment for contravention in 
relation to poppy straw, whereas punishment for contravention 
in relation to coca plant and coca leaves is dealt in Section 16. 
Punishment for contravention in relation to prepared opium in 
Section 17 whereas punishment for contravention in relation to 
opium poppy and opium is contemplated in Section 18. 
5.1.1.	 The measure of sentence in Sections 15, 17 and 
18 is made dependent upon whether the quantity 
involved is small quantity or the quantity lesser than 
commercial but greater than small quantity or whether 
the contravention involves commercial quantity as the 
case may be. Section 16 as well as Section 19 provide 
for punishment for embezzlement of opium by cultivator. 
In the provisions from Section 15 onwards, the specific 
punishment of the term of imprisonment, is expressly 
provided for.
5.1.2.	 Similar is the punishment for contravention in relation 
to manufactured drugs and preparations under Section 
21, wherein also the specific punishment is provided for, 
depending upon the quantity of the contraband involved. 
Provision of Section 22 is in respect of punishment for 
contravention in relation to psychotropic substances 
whereas Section 23 is for punishment for illegal import 
into India, export from India, or transhipments of narcotic 
drugs and psychotropic substances. Section 24 is about 
punishment for external dealings in narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances in contravention of Section 20. 
For the offences under these sections also, punishment 
is expressly and specifically provided. 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
77
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
5.2.	 In the present case, the commission of offence under Section 
20(b)(ii)(C) is established against the appellant convict. Section 
20 which is in respect for punishment for contravention in relation 
to cannabis plant and cannabis reads as under,
‘20. Punishment for contravention in relation to 
cannabis plant and cannabis.—Whoever, in contravention 
of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made or 
condition of licence granted thereunder,— 
(a) cultivates any cannabis plant; or 
(b) produces, manufactures, possesses, sells, 
purchases, transports, imports inter-State, exports 
inter-State or uses cannabis, shall be punishable,— (i) 
where such contravention relates to clause (a) with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees; and 
(ii) where such contravention relates to sub-clause (b),— 
(A) and involves small quantity, with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, or with both; 
(B) and involves quantity lesser than commercial 
quantity but greater than small quantity, with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees; 
(C) and involves commercial quantity, with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
ten years but which may extend to twenty years and 
shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less 
than one lakh rupees but which may extend to two 
lakh rupees: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in 
the judgment, impose a fine exceeding two lakh rupees.’
5.2.1.	 The conviction against the appellant is also recorded 
under Sections 25 and 29 of the Act. Section 25 relates 

78
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to the punishment for allowing premises, etc., to be 
used for commission of an offence. The said section 
is extracted hereinbelow, 
‘25. Punishment for allowing premises, 
etc., to be used for commission of an 
offence.-Whoever, being the owner or occupier 
or having the control or use of any house, 
room, enclosure, space, place, animal or 
conveyance, knowingly permits it to be used 
for the commission by any other person of an 
offence punishable under any provision of this 
Act, shall be punishable with the punishment 
provided for that offence.’
5.2.2.	 Section 29 dealing with the punishment of abetment 
and criminal conspiracy, is reproduced hereinbelow,
‘29. Punishment for abetment and criminal 
conspiracy.—(1) Whoever abets, or is a 
party to a criminal conspiracy to commit, an 
offence punishable under this Chapter, shall, 
whether such offence be or be not committed in 
consequence of such abetment or in pursuance 
of such criminal conspiracy, and notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 116 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860), be punishable with 
the punishment provided for the offence. 
(2) A person abets, or is a party to a criminal 
conspiracy to commit, an offence, within the 
meaning of this section, who, in India, abets 
or is a party to the criminal conspiracy to the 
commission of any act in a place without and 
beyond India which— 
(a) would constitute an offence if committed 
within India; or 
(b) under the laws of such place, is an offence 
relating to narcotic drugs or psychotropic 
substances having all the legal conditions 
required to constitute it such an offence the 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
79
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
same as or analogous to the legal conditions 
required to constitute it an offence punishable 
under this Chapter, if committed within India.’
5.3.	 Reading Sections 15 to 19, 21 to 24, 25A, 27 as well as 
Section 20 which is relevant to the present case, it would be 
noticed that all these sections prescribed punishment and 
sentence separately for the offence related to contraband 
mentioned therein. Section 25 however says that a person 
who is found to be owner or occupier or having the control or 
use of any house, room, enclosure, space, place, animal or 
conveyance, is found to be knowingly permitting it to be used for 
the commission by any other person of an offence punishable 
under any provision of this Act shall be punishable with “the 
punishment provided for that offence”. Similar phraseology is 
employed in respect of punishment in Section 29 which says 
that a person found guilty of abetment and criminal conspiracy 
to commit an offence under Chapter IV “be punishable with the 
punishment provided for the offence”, notwithstanding anything 
contained in Section 116 of the IPC.
5.4.	 The argument is sought to be founded on the variation of 
language in Section 20 (as also noticeable in other sections 
mentioned above) vis-a-vis Sections 25 and 29 that since 
Section 20 specifically provides for a particular punishment 
and Sections 25 and 29 only says that punishment for the 
said offences which may be imposed would be the same “as 
provided for that offence”, the conviction under Sections 25 and 
29 could not have attracted a separate and distinct punishment. 
What is contended is that punishment imposed under Section 
20 on the appellant would take care of the punishment for the 
conviction under Section 25 and Section 29 of the Act, which 
according to learned counsel of the appellant, are only part of 
substantive offence.
5.5.	 The submission namely that the appellant could not have been 
held to have committed offence under Section 25 of the Act in 
as much as the appellant was only sitting in the front seat in the 
car belonging to the other person – the co-convict, therefore, 
could not have been said to have ‘knowingly permitted’ the car 
to be used for the commission of offence by that another person, 

80
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
may be dealt with. The submission which looks attractive at the 
first blush, has no substance when Section 25 is read carefully. 
5.5.1.	 The provision contains the words “occupier” as well as 
“use of any house, space, conveyance, etc. by person”. 
The appellant was an occupier of the car. In capacity of 
occupier the appellant could be said to have committed 
the crime under Section 25. Section 25 could be applied 
to operate in two ways. In any view, along with Section 
25, conviction is also recorded under Section 29. The 
conviction is not challenged.
5.6.	 There exists an apparent fallacy in what is sought to be 
canvassed that separate sentence is not permissible to be 
awarded. Various sections in Chapter IV of the Act relate to 
different independent offences pertaining to the contraband. 
Section 25 and Section 29, which are part of the group of 
sections, also speak of the offences. Allowing premises etc. 
to be used for commission of an offence is conceived by the 
legislature to be a separate offence and engrafted in the Act 
accordingly as an independent offence under Section 25. 
5.6.1.	 In a given case, an offender may have permitted the 
other person to use the house, room, space, place, 
animal or conveyance etc. to facilitate the commission 
of any offence under the Act. This conduct would fall 
squarely within Section 25 to become a distinct and 
independent offence by that person who so permits 
the use of house, conveyance etc. for the purpose of 
committing an offence by the other person.
5.7.	 Looking at Section 29, it speaks of punishment for the offence 
of abetment and criminal conspiracy. An abetment of a thing 
is an independent offence mentioned in the IPC. Section 116, 
IPC mentions about the abetment of offence punishable with 
imprisonment - if offence be or be not committed.
5.7.1.	 Section 116, IPC is relevant to be noticed as under,
‘116. Abetment of offence punishable 
with imprisonment—if offence be not 
committed.— Whoever abets an offence 
punishable with imprisonment shall, if that 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
81
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
offence be not committed in consequence of 
the abetment, and no express provision is 
made by this Code for the punishment of such 
abetment, be punished with imprisonment of 
any description provided for that offence for a 
term which may extend to one-fourth part of the 
longest term provided for that offence; or with 
such fine as is provided for that offence, or with 
both; if abettor or person abetted be a public 
servant whose duty it is to prevent offence.—
and if the abettor or the person abetted is a 
public servant, whose duty it is to prevent the 
commission of such offence, the abettor shall be 
punished with imprisonment of any description 
provided for that offence, for a term which may 
extend to one-half of the longest term provided 
for that offence, or with such fine as is provided 
for the offence, or with both.’
5.7.2.	 Now, Section 29 says that “notwithstanding anything 
contained in Section 116 of the IPC, be punishable 
with the punishment provided for the offence”. What it 
contemplates is that whoever abets the offence under 
the NDPS Act in Chapter IV shall be punished for the 
‘punishment provided for the offence’. In other words, 
the fetter and limitation about the term of imprisonment 
mentioned in Section 116 IPC, is done away with in 
relation to offence of abetment under Section 29 of 
the NDPS Act.
5.8.	 The offence of criminal conspiracy which is inherently covert and 
rarely leaves behind direct traces and whose existence could be 
inferred from the surrounding facts and circumstances, where 
any overt commission of act not always present, is seldom 
capable to be proved by direct evidence. Section 120B, IPC is 
the punishment for the offence of criminal conspiracy. 
5.8.1.	 It is well settled that conspiracy is an independent 
offence. In Gurdeep Singh v. State of Punjab6, this 
6	
(2025) SCC OnLine SC 1669

82
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Court referred to its earlier decision in State (NCT of 
Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu7, as also in Noor Mohammad 
Mohd. Yusuf Momin v. State of Maharashtra8, to 
underline that conspiracy is an independent offence 
and may be punishable even if the substantive offence 
committed by the conspirators does not ultimately 
materialise. 
5.8.2.	 It was held in Noor Mohammad (supra) that Section 
120B, IPC makes criminal conspiracy a substantive 
offence which postulates an agreement between two 
or more persons to do or cause to be done an act by 
illegal means. Thus, criminal conspiracy, which is an 
independent offence, is so incorporated in Section 29 
of the NDPS Act.
6.	
When the offence under Section 25 is entirely possible to be committed 
separately as an independent offence to remain distinct in itself, and 
when the offences of abetment and criminal conspiracy mentioned 
in Section 29 are in themselves independent offences, it is entirely 
logical to deduce and conclude that commission of these offences 
once established, would attract separate punishment and sentence. 
6.1.	 It would not be right to say that when Section 25 and Section 
29 mention the punishment for allowing premises to be used 
for the offence or for abetment and criminal conspiracy in 
the commission of an offence under the Chapter, and that 
punishment is not expressly mentioned, but what is mentioned is 
“punishment for that offence,” it would mean that the imposition 
of separate punishment is not contemplated. Both the Sections 
25 and 29 mention that the commissioner of offence in question 
shall be punishable with the punishment provided for “that 
offence” or “the offence”. 
7.	
Section 25 and Section 29 insofar as they provide that the punishment 
for the respective offences mentioned therein is same which would 
be for the principal offence, is an instance of legislation by reference. 
The legislature has referred to the punishment mentioned in the 
7	
(2005) 11 SCC 600
8	
(1970) 1 SCC 696

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
83
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
particular section to be referred to and applied for the purpose of 
punishment and sentence to be imposed under another section. 
Stating differently, the punishment provided for the offence under 
Section 20 of the Act is mentioned by way of reference under Section 
25 and Section 29 to be read into it in a similar way to be applied 
for the imposition.
7.1.	 The doctrine of reference is a well-recognised tool of legislation. 
It is a process whereby the legislature refers to the provision 
of one statute in the provisions of the other statute to be read 
into the other statute. In that way, the provision in one statute 
becomes part of the provisions of the other statute in which it 
is referred to. Analogous is the doctrine of incorporation, which 
bears a fine distinction with the doctrine of reference where 
provision from one statute is bodily lifted to be incorporated to 
be part of provision in another enactment. 
7.2.	 While the Court is not concerned in this case with the distinction, 
it would suffice to say that the provisions of Section 20, or as 
the case may be, vis-à-vis Sections 25 and 29 in the NDPS Act, 
when refers to the punishment under Section 20 conforming to 
the main offence, as the case may be, to be also the punishment 
under Section 25 and Section 29 of the Act, it also becomes 
legislation by incorporation, since provision in one section of the 
statute is made to be referred, to be read into, and to be applied 
in the provision of other sections of the same statute. Given 
this legislative mandate, the contention has to be negatived 
that no separate punishment and sentence is contemplated in 
respect of Section 25 and Section 29 of the Act.
8.	
However, a riding clarification may be necessary. Even though 
punishment for the offences under Section 25 and Section 29 of the 
Act is separately contemplated and could be imposed independently 
and additionally, in a given case and in most of the cases these 
offences have a connect and an interaction with any of the main 
offences mentioned in Sections 15 to 19, 20 to 24 and others. It may 
happen in large number of cases that offences under Section 25 and 
29, as the case may be, take place along with the other substantive 
offences mentioned in Chapter IV, in course of the same transaction. 
The two offences may be part of an inclusive transaction. In other 
words, though separately punishable, the offences under Sections 
25 and 29 could be parasitic and derivative. 

84
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
8.1.	 The conviction is possible for two offences which may be 
inclusive or interdependent arising out of same course of action 
or the transaction. However, since the offences committed for 
their kind and nature, would be distinct offences, would entail 
separate punishment. Therefore, even while imposing separate 
punishment for such different offences, it would be the rule 
of wisdom to be followed by the court that in such cases, the 
sentence is made to run concurrently. In the instant case, the 
sentences are ordered to run concurrently. 
8.2.	 The punishment and sentence should not result in double 
jeopardy. One of the objects of concurrent running of the sentence 
is to avoid double punishment. This principle would readily apply 
when two separate punishments are awarded, and sentences 
are imposed for two offences relatable to one set of facts. It 
would call for applying concurrent sufferance of punishment.
9.	
This takes the Court to the second remaining question as to whether 
the fine imposed separately as part of the punishment of two offences 
would be liable to be treated concurrent along with the sentences 
of imprisonment.
9.1.	 Section 53 IPC deals with the punishments. It says that 
punishments for which the offenders are liable under the 
provisions of this Code are death, imprisonment whether rigorous 
or simple, forfeiture of property and fine. Both imprisonment 
and fine are treated as punishments.
9.2.	 In the present case, the appellant is sentenced by the High 
Court to undergo 10 years rigorous imprisonment, and to pay 
fine of ₹1,20,000/- and in default to undergo further rigorous 
imprisonment for one year. This is a default imprisonment. In 
Shahejadkhan Mahebubkhan Pathan v. State of Gujarat9, 
this Court observed that the term of imprisonment in default of 
payment of fine is not a sentence it is a penalty which a person 
incurs on account of non-payment of fine. On the other hand, 
it was further observed, if sentence is imposed, an offender 
must undergo unless it is modified or varied in part or whole 
in the judicial proceedings.
9	
(2013) 1 SCC 570

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
85
Hem Raj v. The State of Himachal Pradesh
9.3.	 What it implies is that although the default imprisonment clause 
is taken out of the concept of sentence and is treated as penalty 
for not observing sentence of fine, the amount of fine imposed 
required to be paid by the convict is a sentence and has to be 
treated as part of sentence. Section 53, IPC mentioned above 
also includes fine as a punishment to be part of sentence. In 
that view when the sentence is directed to run concurrently, 
the appellant cannot be made to pay fine twice.
10.	 It is not in dispute that the appellant has undergone total 11 years 
of imprisonment till January 2026, which includes the default 
imprisonment. Since the appellant has suffered the default 
imprisonment also and that he is not required to pay double amount 
of fine, he is entitled to be released from the jail.
10.1.	 As a result, the appellant is directed to be set at liberty forthwith 
unless he is required to be detained in respect of any other 
offence. 
11.	 The appeal is disposed of in the above terms and the direction.
Interlocutory applications, as may have been pending, shall not 
survive.
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
