[2026] 5 S.C.R. 221 : 2026 INSC 367
Shuvendu Saha 
v. 
The State of West Bengal and Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1836 of 2026)
09 April 2026
[Vikram Nath and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The High Court, in a revision filed at the instance of the respondent 
no.2-complainant, set aside the order granting bail to the accused-
appellant herein in a case involving offences triable by the Court 
of Magistrate after a gap of nearly 8 years.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.437 – Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – s.480 – Bail – Grant of – The dispute 
between the appellant and respondent no.2-complainant 
was regarding tenancy rights over a portion of a building – 
Respondent no.2-complainant instituted a civil suit against 
the appellant regarding the same – In the said proceedings, 
the respondent no.2-complainant deposed that the disputes 
between the parties was amicably settled – The Court, taking 
note of the said statement, dismissed the suit – Concealing 
this factum, respondent no.2-complainant filed a complaint 
before the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, who in turn, 
exercised powers u/s.156(3) of the CrPC and forwarded the 
said complaint to the Officer-in-Charge, Police Station, for 
investigation, leading to the registration of FIR u/ss.409, 
417, 418, 419, 420, and 506(ii) of the IPC – The appellant 
was arrested – Subsequently, appellant was granted interim 
bail and thereafter, bail was confirmed on 04.07.2018 – The 
complainant filed a criminal revision before the High Court – 
The High Court set aside the order granting interim bail as 
well as the subsequent orders confirming bail on 06.03.2026 – 
Correctness:
Held: On a perusal of the above order, it is clear that all parameters 
for deciding a bail application filed u/s.437 CrPC (corresponding 
s.480 of the BNSS) were considered by the Magistrate and even 
* Author

222
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the respondent no.2-complainant was provided an opportunity 
of hearing – There was no justification for the Single Judge of 
the High Court to have interfered with the order granting bail, 
more so after a lapse of nearly eight years from the date of order 
granting bail – The issues highlighted in the complaint were 
predominantly having civil overtones, and yet the Single Judge 
proceeded to decide the revision as if it involved questions of grave 
legal importance – Once the trial Court had exercised jurisdiction 
u/s.437 CrPC to affirm the order of interim bail passed in favour 
of the accused, the same could only be cancelled or set aside 
on the principles governing cancellation of bail laid down by this 
Court in a catena of decisions – The discretion of the High Court 
was heavily swayed by the reason that safety of the respondent 
no.2-complainant was at risk, was far removed from reality – The 
order of the High Court does not reflect or refer to any such 
event or incident which may have caused any life threat or risk to 
the respondent no.2-complainant – The view taken by the High 
Court is wholly perverse, apart from being in gross disregard of 
the mandate of s.437 of CrPC – A Rule (Rule 183 of the Calcutta 
High Court Criminal (Subordinate Courts) Rules, 1985) contained 
in the Criminal Rules and Orders, which governs the procedural 
aspects of day-to-day functioning of criminal Courts, could not 
have been invoked to override the substantive mandate of the 
CrPC unless a gross failure of justice was demonstrated in the 
proceedings – No palpable material on record to show that the 
Magistrate had substantially breached the procedure provided 
under the said rule – The impugned order is audaciously perverse 
and illegal, and hence, the same cannot be sustained. [Paras 21, 
22, 25, 27, 29, 32, 33]
Judiciary – Adverse remarks – Castigation of Judicial Officers – 
Recording of adverse remarks/strictures against them by 
the High Court – Power of superintendence is not a tool of 
oppression:
Held: It has become a trend to castigate Judicial Officers and 
record adverse remarks/strictures against them in judicial orders 
passed by the High Court in the exercise of supervisory, appellate 
or revisional jurisdiction – The High Court, being a Court of record 
in the State, is expected to act as the guardian of the Officers 
in district judiciary – While finding infirmities in the order passed 
by a Judicial Officer, the immediate reaction ought not to be to 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
223
Shuvendu Saha v. The State of West Bengal and Anr.
make adverse or disparaging observations against the concerned 
Judicial Officer in a judicial dispensation – Such disparaging 
remarks/strictures may ruin the career of the Judicial Officer in 
addition to demoralising the district judiciary as a whole – Power of 
superintendence conferred upon the High Courts by Art.227 of the 
Constitution of India ought not to be used as a tool of oppression 
but rather as a mechanism for nurturing and guiding the Judicial 
Officers in the State. [Paras 35, 36]
Constitution of India – Art.227 – Power of Superintendence 
conferred upon the High Court – Mechanism to guide Judicial 
Officers – Merits or quality of the order to be noted on the 
remark slip:
Held: In some High Courts an in-house mechanism is already in 
place to take care of a situation, whenever any flaw or infirmity is 
noted in any order passed by the trial Judge by the High Court 
while exercising the supervisory jurisdiction – The observations of 
the Hon’ble Judge/Bench on the merits or quality of the order or 
the proceedings of the presiding officer of the trial Court can be 
noted in a remark slip which, in turn, would be placed before the 
administrative Judge or the Chief Justice of the High Court, as the 
case may be, for necessary follow-up action. [Para 37]
Constitution of India – Art.227 – Power of Superintendence 
conferred upon the High Court – Merits or quality of the 
order passed by Judicial Officers – A format of remark-slip – 
Illustrated. [Para 38]
Case Law Cited
Dolat Ram v. State of Haryana [1994] Supp. 6 SCR 69 : (1995) 
1 SCC 349 – relied on.
X v. State of Telangana [2018] 4 SCR 466 : (2018) 16 SCC 511; 
CBI v. Subramani Gopalakrishnan [2011] 5 SCR 824 : (2011) 
5 SCC 296; Neeru Yadav v. State of U.P. [2015] 10 SCR 802 : 
(2016) 15 SCC 422 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; Constitution of India; Calcutta 
High Court Criminal (Subordinate Courts) Rules, 1985.

224
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
List of Keywords
Bail; sublato fundamento cadit opus; Opportunity of hearing; 
Section 437 of CrPC; Cancellation of bail; Rule 183 of Calcutta High 
Court Criminal (Subordinate Courts) Rules, 1985; Hyper-technical 
view; Judiciary; Adverse remarks; Castigation of Judicial Officers; 
Art.227 of Constitution; Power of Superintendence conferred upon 
the High Court; Format of remark slip.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1836 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 06.03.2026 of the High Court 
at Calcutta in CRR No. 1248 of 2018.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Siva Prasad Ghose, Anondo Mukherjee, Ms. Parul Sharma, Jitender 
Kumar, Anil Kumar.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Rohit Dutta, Anas Tanwir, Suryanu Sengupta, Dhrubajit Saikia, 
Ms. A. Banerjee, Ms. Geetanjali Nagpal, Kunal Mimani, Prashant 
Alai, Abhinav Rana.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
Mehta, J.
1.	
Heard.
2.	
Issue notice.
3.	
Mr. Kunal Mimani, learned counsel appearing for the State of West 
Bengal, accepts notice on advance service. Mr. Rohit Dutta, learned 
counsel, appears via video conferencing on behalf of respondent 
No.21 on caveat.
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “respondent No.2-complainant”.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
225
Shuvendu Saha v. The State of West Bengal and Anr.
4.	
Leave granted.
5.	
Facts involved in the present appeal manifest a remarkably perverse 
exercise of revisional jurisdiction by learned Single Judge of the High 
Court at Calcutta2 who has, in a revision filed at the instance of the 
respondent No.2-complainant, set aside the order granting bail to 
the accused-appellant3 herein in a case involving offences triable 
by Court of Magistrate after a gap of nearly 8 years on absolutely 
hyper technical and untenable reasons.
6.	
The dispute between the appellant and respondent No.2-complainant 
is with regard to tenancy rights over a portion of a building, which 
was purchased by the appellant from its erstwhile owner. Respondent 
No.2-complainant instituted a civil suit against the appellant, being 
Title Suit No.328 of 2016, seeking declaration of her tenancy in 
respect of a room admeasuring approximately 150 sq. ft.
7.	
On 15th September, 2017, in the proceedings of the civil suit, the 
respondent No.2-complainant entered the witness box and deposed 
that the disputes between the parties had been amicably settled and, 
in view thereof, she did not wish to proceed with the said suit. The 
Court, taking note of the said statement, recorded that the dispute 
stood settled between the parties and dismissed the suit by an 
order of the even date. Concealing the factum of the aforesaid civil 
proceedings and the settlement, the respondent No.2-complainant 
filed a complaint on 28th November, 2017 before the learned Additional 
Chief Judicial Magistrate4, Sealdah, who in turn, by order dated 
28th November, 2017 exercised powers under Section 156(3) of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure5 and forwarded the said complaint to 
the Officer-in-Charge, Cossipore Police Station, for investigation, 
leading to the registration of FIR No.257 dated 8th December, 2017 
for the offences punishable under Sections 409, 417, 418, 419, 420, 
and 506(ii) of the Indian Penal Code, 18606.
8.	
The appellant was arrested in connection with the aforesaid case 
and was produced before the Magistrate concerned on 3rd May, 
2	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “High Court”.
3	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “appellant” or “accused”.
4	
Hereinafter, referred to as the ‘‘Magistrate”.
5	
For short, ‘CrPC’.
6	
For short, ‘IPC’.

226
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2018. His initial prayer for bail came to be rejected on the same 
day. Subsequently, the learned Magistrate granted interim bail to the 
appellant on 7th May, 2018, which was thereafter confirmed by the 
learned Magistrate on 4th July, 2018. The complainant challenged the 
order granting interim bail to the appellant by filing Criminal Revision 
No.1248 of 2018 before the High Court.
9.	
Learned Single Judge of the High Court allowed the said revision by 
the impugned order dated 6th March, 2026, holding that the Magistrate 
had acted contrary to Rule 183 of the Calcutta High Court Criminal 
(Subordinate Courts) Rules, 1985, and that there was an infirmity 
in the order of the learned Magistrate, which only bore his initials 
and lacked proper authentication. The High Court, accordingly, set 
aside the order granting interim bail as well as the subsequent orders 
confirming bail. 
10.	 The learned Single Judge further held that the order granting bail was 
also vitiated on account of not providing an opportunity of effective 
hearing to the respondent No.2-complainant. While concluding the 
order, the learned Single Judge granted interim protection to the 
appellant.
11.	 The aforesaid order dated 6th March, 2026 is under challenge at 
the instance of the appellant in the present appeal by special leave.
12.	 We have extensively heard learned counsel for the parties and have 
gone through the impugned order and the material placed on record.
13.	 Learned counsel representing the appellant has placed for our perusal 
a copy of the order dated 16th March, 2026 passed by the learned 
ACJM, Sealdah, whereby the appellant, upon being re-arrested post 
passing of the impugned order, was presented before the learned 
Magistrate and was granted bail on certain terms and conditions. 
We could have closed these proceedings on this premise alone. 
However, we deem it necessary that some discussion be made on 
the order passed by the High Court, which, ex facie, suffers from 
gross perversity.
14.	 First of all, we may note that in a case involving Magistrate triable 
offences, the appellant had been granted bail by the jurisdictional 
Magistrate way back in the year 2018. The revision preferred by 
respondent No.2-complainant against the said order granting bail 
came to be heard and decided by the learned Single Judge of the 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
227
Shuvendu Saha v. The State of West Bengal and Anr.
High Court in the year 2026, and on absolutely hyper-technical 
grounds and by undertaking a hair-splitting exercise, the learned 
Single Judge proceeded to set aside the order granting bail to the 
appellant.
15.	 We are of the firm opinion that the learned Single Judge misdirected 
himself while setting aside the order granting bail passed by the 
learned Magistrate. It is manifest from the impugned order that the 
learned Single Judge failed to advert to the fact that prior to the 
lodging of the complaint, respondent No.2-complainant had filed a 
civil suit in relation to the very same dispute, wherein, she made a 
deposition stating that the matter had been amicably settled and, 
therefore, the suit was not required to be proceeded with. 
16.	 Consequently, based on the said statement, the civil suit was 
dismissed on 15th September, 2017 noting that the dispute stood 
amicably settled. Concealing this material fact, respondent No.2-
complainant preferred the application under Section 156(3) of CrPC, 
on the basis whereof FIR No.257 dated 8th December, 2017 came 
to be registered against the appellant at Police Station Cossipore. 
17.	 On going through the FIR, we find the same to be highly belated 
and additionally, even if the allegations set out in the FIR were 
accepted as true on the face of record, the case has overtones of a 
civil dispute, plain and simple, and hence, it was not a case wherein 
the accused could have been denied bail.
18.	 Needless to state that cancellation of bail/setting aside of the bail 
order impinges upon the liberty of an individual. Law is well settled 
by a catena of decisions7 of this Court that orders granting bail ought 
not to be lightly interfered with.
19.	 In the present case, which involves magistrate triable offences, the 
accused had been arrested on 3rd May, 2018, and he was granted 
interim bail by the learned Magistrate on 7th May, 2018, which order 
was subsequently confirmed on 4th July, 2018. 
20.	 For the sake of ready reference, we extract the order dated 7th May, 
2018, passed by the learned Magistrate: -
7	
X v. State of Telangana, (2018) 16 SCC 511; Dolat Ram v. State of Haryana, (1995) 1 SCC 349; CBI v. 
Subramani Gopalakrishnan, (2011) 5 SCC 296; Neeru Yadav v. State of U.P., (2016) 15 SCC 422.

228
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“Heard both sides. Perused C/R and C/D perused petition 
filed by defacto complainant. Heard Ld. Advocate for the 
defacto complainant.
Considering-
a) Period of detention
b) No progress in investigation during P/C period.
c) No prayer for further P/C by I/O.
d) No prayer for custodial interrogation.
e) No mention to threat to defacto in today’s remand by I/O.
I do not find any reason for further detention of prosecute 
accused in I/C in the interest of investigation. Hence, all 
objections raised against bail are turned down. Bail prayer 
is allowed, albeit on interim basis.
Sole accused may be enlarged on A/I bail of Rs.2000/-with 
1 surety (sic) Rs. of like amount. ID to J/C.
If no bail to 7.6.18 for app. Further order as to bail and 
report.
Return C/D.
Sd/-”
21.	 On a perusal of the above order, it is clear that all parameters 
for deciding a bail application filed under Section 437 CrPC 
(corresponding Section 480 of the BNSS) were considered by the 
learned Magistrate and even the respondent No.2-complainant 
was provided an opportunity of hearing. Hence, we have no 
hesitation in holding that there was no justification whatsoever for 
the learned Single Judge to have interfered with the order granting 
bail, more so after a lapse of nearly eight years from the date of 
order granting bail.
22.	 We, emphatically reiterate that the issues highlighted in the complaint 
were predominantly having civil overtones, and yet the learned Single 
Judge proceeded to decide the revision as if it involved questions 
of grave legal importance. The following questions of law and fact 
were in fact formulated and thereafter adjudicated upon: -

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
229
Shuvendu Saha v. The State of West Bengal and Anr.
“6. The resolution of the instant revision hinges upon the 
following pivotal questions of law and fact: 
i. whether an order of interim bail is sustainable in law if it 
fails to comply with the mandatory procedural safeguards 
enshrined in Rule 183 of the Criminal Rules and Orders 
(Cr.R.O.) regarding authentication? 
ii. whether the Learned Magistrate’s refusal to record 
specific reasons for “turning down” the victim’s objections, 
despite the mandate of Section 2(wa) of the Code, 
constitutes an abdication of judicial duty?
iii. whether this Court, in exercise of its supervisory 
jurisdiction under Article 227, is empowered to strike 
down an order passed in manifest violation of binding 
administrative directions and judicial precedents of the 
High Court?” 
23.	 The learned Single Judge, for cancelling the bail granted to the 
accused in a case involving Magistrate’s triable offences after 8 
years of the event and after nearly 15 years of the alleged offence, 
assigned the following reasons in the impugned order: -
“21. Upon a holistic consideration of the facts and the settled 
position of law, I am of the firm opinion that the impugned 
order of bail suffers from a dual infirmity-procedural and 
substantive. Procedurally, the total disregard for the 
authentication protocols under Rule 183 of the Cr.R.O. and 
the binding directives of this Court in Sharmistha Chowdhuri 
(supra) renders the record a mere scrap of paper lacking 
judicial solemnity. Substantively, the failure to recognize 
the statutory rights of the “victim” under Section 2(w)(a) 
of the Code and the summary dismissal of documented 
life-threats constitutes a manifest failure of justice.
22. Therefore, this Court arrives at the legal conclusion 
that the liberty of an accused, while precious, cannot be 
protected by an order that is “born in sin,” i.e., an order 
passed in defiance of the High Court’s administrative 
and judicial discipline. A bail order which is (a) unsigned 
or partially initialled in violation of Rule 183 Cr.R.O., (b) 
unreasoned regarding the specific objections of a victim, 

230
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and (c) indifferent to the history of witness intimidation, 
is a perverse order that the High Court is duty-bound to 
strike down under Section 482 and under Article 227 of 
the Constitution to prevent a miscarriage of justice. 
23. This Court finds that the Learned Magistrate exercised 
his discretion arbitrarily and in defiance of binding 
precedents. The subsequent confirmation of bail cannot 
validate an order that failed to consider the life-threat 
to the elderly widow/petitioner. Consequentially, it is 
ordered that: 
a. the order dated May 7, 2018, and all subsequent 
orders confirming the bail of Opposite Party No. 2, 
Suvendu Saha, are hereby set aside and quashed. 
The liberty granted to the accused stands revoked 
with immediate effect. 
b. the Opposite Party No. 2 is directed to surrender 
before the Learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Sealdah, within 48 hours from the communication of 
this order. Failure to do so shall result in immediate 
arrest of the petitioner / accused by the Officer-in-
Charge, Cossipore P.S. and produce him before the 
Court below in custody. 
c. Upon surrender/arrest, the Learned Additional 
Chief Judicial Magistrate shall hear the bail prayer de 
novo, providing a mandatory and meaningful hearing 
to the Victim or her authorized counsel, perusing the 
updated Case Diary and specifically record findings on 
the allegations of post-arrest threats and intimidation, 
and recording the order in strict compliance with Rule 
183 Cr.R.O. and the format mandated in Sharmistha 
Chowdhuri. 
d. The failure of the Learned Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate to comply with the mandatory 
requirements of Rule 183 of the Cr.R.O. and the 
administrative circulars issued by this Court, is a 
matter of grave concern. Judicial discipline requires 
that District courts strictly adhere to the formats and 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
231
Shuvendu Saha v. The State of West Bengal and Anr.
protocols established by the High Court to ensure 
the transparency and integrity of judicial records. 
e. the Registrar (Judicial Service) is directed to 
call for an explanation from the concerned Judicial 
Officer as to why the mandatory provisions of Rule 
183 and the administrative circulars of this Court 
were bypassed. A copy of this order shall be placed 
in the Annual Confidential Report (ACR) dossier of 
the said officer, and a formal warning shall be issued 
to ensure future circumspection. 
f. To prevent such “jurisdictional insubordination” from 
becoming a norm, the Registrar General is directed 
to re-circulate the mandatory directions contained in 
Paragraphs 35, 36, and 37 of Sharmistha Chowdhuri 
to all judicial officers in the State of West Bengal and 
the Union Territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands. 
g. All District Judges are directed to ensure compliance 
through periodic inspections of order-sheets. Any 
persistent default by any judicial officer in signing 
order sheets in full or taking external assistance 
for recording orders shall be reported to the High 
Court on the administrative side for the initiation of 
appropriate departmental proceedings. 
h. The Director of the West Bengal State Judicial 
Academy is directed to include a specific module on 
the “Recording of Judicial Orders and Authentication 
of Records” in the induction and refresher courses for 
judicial officers, emphasizing the legal consequences 
of non-compliance with the Criminal Rules and 
Orders.
i. The Commissioner of Police, Kolkata, is directed 
to ensure adequate and continuous protection for 
the Petitioner and her family. The interim protection 
already granted shall remain in force until the final 
disposal of the de novo bail prayer by the Court below.” 
24.	 Learned Single Judge, while setting aside the order of the Magistrate, 
held the order granting bail to be arbitrary and in defiance of binding 

232
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
precedents. The learned Single Judge also directed the Registrar 
General to call for an explanation from the concerned Judicial 
Officer and considered the same to be a case of “jurisdictional 
insubordination” which had to be prevented. We feel that the aforesaid 
observations were wholly misplaced and uncalled for.	
25.	 The High Court proceeded on the premise of the latin maxim ‘sublato 
fundamento cadit opus’, which, translated literally, means ‘when 
infrastructure fails, superstructure must fail’. We are of the firm 
opinion that the said maxim had no application to the case at hand 
as herein, the purported infrastructure was the order dated 7th May, 
2018, granting interim bail to the accused which stood subsumed 
in the final order granting bail dated 4th July, 2018. It is absolutely 
unacceptable that the final order granting bail could have been set 
at naught merely because in the opinion of the High Court, some 
infirmities existed in the order granting interim bail to the accused. 
Once the trial Court had exercised jurisdiction under Section 437 CrPC 
to affirm the order of interim bail passed in favour of the accused, 
the same could only be cancelled or set aside on the principles 
governing cancellation of bail laid down by this Court in a catena of 
decisions. In this regard, we may gainfully refer to the judgment of 
this Court in Dolat Ram v. State of Haryana8, the relevant paragraph 
whereof is extracted hereinbelow:-
“4. Rejection of bail in a non-bailable case at the 
initial stage and the cancellation of bail so granted, 
have to be considered and dealt with on different 
basis. Very cogent and overwhelming circumstances 
are necessary for an order directing the cancellation 
of the bail, already granted. Generally speaking, 
the grounds for cancellation of bail, broadly 
(illustrative and not exhaustive) are: interference 
or attempt to interfere with the due course of 
administration of justice or evasion or attempt 
to evade the due course of justice or abuse of 
the concession granted to the accused in any 
manner. The satisfaction of the court, on the 
basis of material placed on the record of the 
8	
(1995) 1 SCC 349 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 237.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
233
Shuvendu Saha v. The State of West Bengal and Anr.
possibility of the accused absconding is yet 
another reason justifying the cancellation of bail. 
However, bail once granted should not be cancelled 
in a mechanical manner without considering whether 
any supervening circumstances have rendered it no 
longer conducive to a fair trial to allow the accused 
to retain his freedom by enjoying the concession 
of bail during the trial. These principles, it appears, 
were lost sight of by the High Court when it decided 
to cancel the bail, already granted. The High Court 
it appears to us overlooked the distinction of the 
factors relevant for rejecting bail in a non-bailable 
case in the first instance and the cancellation of bail 
already granted.”
[Emphasis supplied]
26.	 The discretion of the High Court was also heavily swayed by the 
reason that safety of the respondent No.2-complainant was at risk. 
We feel that the said observation of the High Court was far removed 
from reality.
27.	 The order granting bail was passed in the year 2018, whereas the 
revision came to be heard and decided in the year 2026. Neither 
does the order of the High Court reflect so nor was any such 
material available on record which could have compelled the High 
Court to hold that there was any risk to the life of the respondent 
No.2-complainant. The order of the High Court does not reflect or 
refer to any such event or incident which may have caused any life 
threat or risk to the respondent No.2-complainant. Hence, we are 
of the firm opinion that the order passed by the High Court suffers 
from total non-application of mind.
28.	 Graciously enough, while setting aside the bail granted to the accused, 
the High Court directed that adequate protection be provided to the 
respondent No.2-complainant and that the interim protection granted 
to the accused shall remain in force till the final disposal of the de 
novo bail prayer by the jurisdictional Court. In consequence thereof, 
the accused surrendered before the trial Court and has been released 
on bail by order dated 16th March, 2026, which has been placed for 
our perusal by learned counsel for the accused.

234
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
29.	 We find that the view taken by the High Court is wholly perverse, 
apart from being in gross disregard of the mandate of Section 437 
of CrPC. The learned Single Judge gave primacy to Rule 183 of the 
Calcutta High Court Criminal (Subordinate Courts) Rules, 1985 to set 
at naught an order granting bail to the accused under the provisions 
of CrPC. We, prima facie, feel that a Rule contained in the Criminal 
Rules and Orders, which governs the procedural aspects of day-to-
day functioning of criminal Courts, could not have been invoked to 
override the substantive mandate of the CrPC unless a gross failure 
of justice was demonstrated in the proceedings.
30.	 On going through the order dated 7th May, 2018 passed by the learned 
Magistrate granting interim bail to the accused, we find that the same 
records that an opportunity of hearing was granted to respondent 
No.2-complainant and assigns cogent and substantial reasons for 
releasing the accused on bail.
31.	 Rule 183 of Calcutta High Court Criminal (Subordinate Courts) Rules, 
1985, on which the order of the learned Single Judge is premised, 
provides that orders requiring the exercise of judicial discretion and 
the final order shall be recorded by the Magistrate in his own hand 
or typed by him, others may be recorded under his direction by the 
Bench Clerk. 
32.	 However, we do not find any palpable material on record to show 
that the learned Magistrate had substantially breached the procedure 
provided under the said rule while drawing up the order granting bail 
to the accused. The violation, if any, was too hyper-technical and 
trivial so as to be made a ground for setting aside the bail granted 
to the accused nearly 8 years ago.
33.	 Therefore, we have no option but to hold that the impugned order 
is audaciously perverse and illegal, and hence, the same cannot 
be sustained. The impugned order dated 6th March, 2026, is hence 
quashed and set aside.
34.	 Though we have already quashed and set aside the impugned order 
in entirety still, for ensuring that the service career of the concerned 
Judicial officer is not adversely effected, we further emphasize and 
provide that the directions given by the learned Single Judge in 
paragraphs e, f, g and h of the impugned order making observations 
on the conduct of the Ld. Judicial Officer; directing placement of the 
impugned order dated 6th March, 2026 in the Annual Confidential 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
235
Shuvendu Saha v. The State of West Bengal and Anr.
Report (A.C.R.) of the Judicial Officer; directing the Registrar (Judicial 
Service) to call for an explanation from the Judicial Officer and 
making an observation that the order passed by the Judicial Officer 
tantamounted to “jurisdictional insubordination” shall stand expressly 
omitted, quashed and set aside. 
35.	 Before parting, we may record a discordant note that it has become a 
recent trend to castigate Judicial Officers and record adverse remarks/
strictures against them in judicial orders passed by the High Court 
in the exercise of supervisory, appellate or revisional jurisdiction. 
The High Court, being a Court of record in the State, is expected to 
act as the guardian of the Officers in district judiciary. While finding 
infirmities in the order passed by a Judicial Officer, the immediate 
reaction ought not to be to make adverse or disparaging observations 
against the concerned Judicial Officer in a judicial dispensation. 
36.	 Such disparaging remarks/strictures may ruin the career of the 
Judicial Officer in addition to demoralising the district judiciary as a 
whole. Power of superintendence conferred upon the High Courts 
by Article 227 of the Constitution of India ought not to be used as 
a tool of oppression but rather as a mechanism for nurturing and 
guiding the Judicial Officers in the State. 
37.	 In some High Courts an in-house mechanism is already in place to 
take care of a situation, whenever any flaw or infirmity is noted in any 
order passed by the trial Judge by the High Court while exercising 
the supervisory jurisdiction. The observations of the Hon’ble Judge/
Bench on the merits or quality of the order or the proceedings of 
the presiding officer of the trial Court can be noted in a remark slip 
which, in turn, would be placed before the administrative Judge or the 
Chief Justice of the High Court, as the case may be, for necessary 
follow-up action.
38.	 For the sake of illustration, the format of such remark-slip which is 
provided in the practice and procedure of the High Court of Judicature 
for Rajasthan is extracted hereinbelow: -
COURT REMARKS ON THE 
JUDGMENT DATED ………….. 
X v. Y 
RENDERED BY SHRI..................................
****

236
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Description of case. 
No. ________________ of 20 
Date of Judgment ……..
(a)	 Judgment dated ………: -
(1)	 Whether lucid, to the point, logical,
(2)	 Whether discussion of evidence and thorough.
(3)	 Whether sentence or order appropriate.
(4)	 Whether above standard or below standard. 
(b)	 Conduct of proceedings: -
[Here any remarks about clearing of pleadings, framing 
of issues or charge sheets, control over examination of 
witnesses, proper keeping of double record, eliciting of all 
material facts, adjournments, delay in delivery of judgment 
and doing of full day’s work may be entered.]
Note:-	
(1) Bench Reader will attach this slip at 
the top of the first page of each judgment 
when the Judge is being asked to sign that  
judgment.
(2) The slip containing the remarks shall be 
sent to the Hon’ble Judge in the Administrative 
Department.
PROFORMA
S. 
No.
Particulars of the 
case in the lower 
court viz No. of 
case/appeal/tile/
date of decision
Particular of the case 
of the High Court 
viz. No. of appeal/
revision, title and 
date of decision
W h e t h e r 
categories 
as standard 
o r 
N o 
remarks
39.	 It is our firm opinion that it would be highly advisable if similar 
practice of recording remarks on various facets of the judgments/
orders passed by Officers in the district judiciary is adopted 
by all High Courts for appropriate action on the administrative 
side.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
237
Shuvendu Saha v. The State of West Bengal and Anr.
40.	 The Registry shall circulate a copy of this order to the Registrar 
Generals of all the High Courts for being placed before the Hon’ble 
Chief Justice for information and such follow-up action as may be 
deemed appropriate.
41.	 The appeal is allowed accordingly.
42.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
