[2026] 5 S.C.R. 146 : 2026 INSC 356
Nitendra Kumar Tomer, Suspended Director,  
Ambro Asia Private Limited  
v. 
Unox S.P.A. and Another
(Civil Appeal No. 3607 of 2026)
10 April 2026
[Sanjay Kumar* and K. Vinod Chandran, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Once the prescribed limitation period u/s.61(2) of Insolvency 
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 expired, whether it was open to the 
suspended director to take steps to convert the incompetent appeal 
and maintain an appeal in his own name.
Headnotes†
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 – ss.16, 17, 61 – 
A  suspended director of Ambro Asia Private Limited, the 
corporate debtor, filed the present appeal u/s.62 of the 
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, aggrieved by the 
judgment dated 07.01.2026 passed by the NCLAT – By the said 
judgment, the NCLAT confirmed the order dated 18.04.2024 
passed by the NCLT, admitting CP (IB) No. 722/ND/2021, 
an application filed u/s.9 of the Code by Unox S.P.A., an 
operational creditor, respondent no.1 – Earlier, the NCLAT 
had permitted the appeal to be prosecuted by the suspended 
director of the corporate debtor – Correctness:
Held: Once the interim resolution professional was named by the 
NCLT in the admission order, s.17(1)(a) of the Code would become 
operative – Therefore, with effect from the date of admission in the 
case on hand, i.e., 18.04.2024, the management of the affairs of the 
corporate debtor, Ambro Asia Private Limited, stood vested in Interim 
Resolution Professional, and it was not open to the suspended 
director of the corporate debtor to file an appeal in the name of 
the corporate debtor, Ambro Asia Private Limited, claiming to be 
its director and authorized representative – The appeal as framed 
and filed on 24.04.2024 before the NCLAT was, therefore, wholly 
incompetent – It was not merely a ‘defective’ appeal as it was not 
maintainable in its very inception – The normal period of limitation 
* Author

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
147
Nitendra Kumar Tomer, Suspended Director, Ambro Asia  
Private Limited v. Unox S.P.A. and Another
prescribed u/s.61(2) is 30 days but the proviso thereto permits the 
NCLAT to condone the delay of up to 15 days, if sufficient cause 
is shown for not filing the appeal within the prescribed period of 
30 days – This being the legal position, the indulgence shown by 
the NCLAT on 12.08.2025 completely desecrated the aforestated 
statutory prescription – The suspended director of the corporate 
debtor, could have filed an appeal against the admission order dated 
18.04.2024 only within the limitation period prescribed u/s.61(2) of 
the Code – The misconceived appeal filed by him in the name of 
the corporate debtor, Ambro Asia Private Limited, professing to be 
its director and authorized representative, was wholly incompetent 
and was not an appeal with a ‘curable’ defect, which could have 
been attended to at a later point of time – It was, therefore, not 
open to the said suspended director to seek modification of the 
cause title in this incompetent appeal – Unfortunately, the NCLAT 
lost sight of this aspect and treated the wholly incompetent appeal 
as a merely defective one, whereby it deemed it appropriate to 
grant time to the suspended director to amend the memo of the 
appeal – Once the prescribed limitation period u/s.61(2) expired, 
it was not open to the suspended director to take steps to convert 
the incompetent appeal and maintain an appeal in his own name – 
The NCLAT ought not to have permitted him to do so, whereby 
a time-barred appeal in the name of the suspended director was 
presented and entertained. [Paras 6, 7, 8]
Case Law Cited
Uday Shankar Triyar v. Ram Kalewar Prasad Singh and another 
[2005] Supp. 5 SCR 157 : (2006) 1 SCC 75; Varun Pahwa v. Renu 
Chaudhary [2019] 4 SCR 128 : (2019) 15 SCC 628; Innovators 
Cleantech Pvt. Ltd. v. Pasari Multi Projects Pvt. Ltd., 2024 SCC 
OnLine NCLAT 909 – held inapplicable.
List of Acts
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
List of Keywords
Corporate debtor; Operational creditor; Interim resolution professional; 
Limitation; Curable defect; Maintainability; Modification of cause title; 
Incompetent appeal; Suspended director; Amended memo of appeal; 
Section 61(2) of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.

148
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3607 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 07.01.2026 of the National 
Company Law Apellate Tribunal in CAAT(I) No. 931 of 2024.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Rakesh Kumar Khanna, Sr. Adv., Abhishek Swarup, Manoj Swarup, 
Aditya Pushkar Khanna, Ms. Arushi Jindal, Govind Kashyap,  
S.S. Nehra, Chetan Sharma, M/s. Manoj Swarup And Co.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Rahul Chitnis, Savinder Singh, Parth Awasthi, Ms. Barnali 
Mukherjee, Hersh Desai, M/s. F.M. Associates.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Kumar, J.
1.	
Nitendra Kumar Tomer, a suspended director of Ambro Asia Private 
Limited, the corporate debtor, filed the present appeal under Section 
62 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 20161, aggrieved by the 
judgment dated 07.01.2026 passed by the National Company Law 
Appellate Tribunal, Principal Bench, New Delhi (hereinafter, ‘the 
NCLAT’), in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 931 of 2024. By 
the said judgment, the NCLAT confirmed the order dated 18.04.2024 
passed by the National Company Law Tribunal, New Delhi Bench 
(hereinafter, ‘the NCLT’), admitting CP (IB) No. 722/ND/2021, an 
application filed under Section 9 of the Code by Unox S.P.A., an 
operational creditor, respondent No. 1 herein. 
2.	
At the outset, we entertained a doubt as to how the appeal before the 
NCLAT had been filed in the name of the corporate debtor, Ambro 
Asia Private Limited, after admission of the Section 9 application by 
the NCLT, vide order dated 18.04.2024. Thereupon, we were informed 
that this aspect was taken note of by the NCLAT. Our attention was 
1	
For short, ‘the Code’

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
149
Nitendra Kumar Tomer, Suspended Director, Ambro Asia  
Private Limited v. Unox S.P.A. and Another
drawn to the order dated 12.08.2025 passed by the NCLAT. Therein, 
the NCLAT noted that the appeal had been filed in the name of 
the corporate debtor whereas, after admission of the application 
under Section 9, the corporate debtor could be represented only 
by the interim resolution professional but the appeal, as instituted, 
was verified by Nitendra Kumar Tomer, a suspended director of the 
corporate debtor. The NCLAT further noted that an appeal in the 
name of the corporate debtor was not maintainable against an order 
of admission of an application under Section 9. 
3.	
Having stated so, the NCLAT surprisingly went on to state that for the 
ends of justice, it deemed it appropriate to provide an opportunity to 
the appellant to amend the memo of appeal by filing an appropriate 
application and granted time. Thereafter, IA No. 4983 of 2025 was 
filed seeking amendment of the memo of appeal and the NCLAT 
allowed that application on 29.08.2025, permitting the appeal to be 
prosecuted by Nitendra Kumar Tomer, the suspended director of 
the corporate debtor. The appeal memo was taken on record, but 
we find that the final judgment dated 07.01.2026, presently under 
challenge before us, did not take note of the amended appeal memo 
and the judgment, as it stands, reflects the name of the corporate 
debtor as the appellant. 
4.	
Having given thoughtful consideration to the matter, we are of the 
considered opinion that the NCLAT grossly erred in permitting a 
wholly incompetent appeal to be converted in the manner it was done. 
We may note that this incompetent appeal was filed on 24.04.2024 
or thereabouts, assailing the order of admission dated 18.04.2024, 
and it was verified in the name of the corporate debtor, viz., Ambro 
Asia Private Limited, by Nitendra Kumar Tomer, claiming to be its 
director and authorized representative. However, respondent No. 2 
in the appeal was none other than Piyush Moona, Interim Resolution 
Professional, who was appointed by the NCLT, vide the admission 
order dated 18.04.2024. 
5.	
In this regard, reference may be made to Section 16 of the Code, 
titled ‘Appointment and tenure of interim resolution professional’. 
Insofar as an application under Section 9 of the Code is concerned, 
Section 16(3) is of relevance and it reads as under: -
‘(3) Where the application for corporate insolvency 
resolution process is made by an operational creditor and – 

150
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(a) no proposal for an interim resolution professional 
is made, the Adjudicating Authority shall make a 
reference to the Board for the recommendation of an 
insolvency professional who may act as an interim 
resolution professional;
(b) a proposal for an interim resolution professional is 
made under sub-section (4) of section 9, the resolution 
professional as proposed, shall be appointed as 
the interim resolution professional, if no disciplinary 
proceedings are pending against him.’
6.	
Section 17(1)(a) of the Code provides that, from the date of 
appointment of the interim resolution professional, the management of 
the affairs of the corporate debtor shall vest in the interim resolution 
professional. In the case on hand, it is clear that the application filed 
by Unox S.P.A. under Section 9 of the Code itself named the proposed 
interim resolution professional, as the order dated 18.04.2024, which 
is conveniently not placed on record along with this appeal, named 
Piyush Moona as the Interim Resolution Professional and he was, 
accordingly, shown as respondent No. 2 in the appeal filed before 
the NCLAT. Once the interim resolution professional was named by 
the NCLT in the admission order, Section 17(1)(a) of the Code would 
become operative. Therefore, with effect from the date of admission 
in the case on hand, i.e., 18.04.2024, the management of the affairs 
of the corporate debtor, Ambro Asia Private Limited, stood vested in 
Piyush Moona, Interim Resolution Professional, and it was not open 
to the suspended director of the corporate debtor to file an appeal 
in the name of the corporate debtor, Ambro Asia Private Limited, 
claiming to be its director and authorized representative. The appeal 
as framed and filed on 24.04.2024 was, therefore, wholly incompetent. 
It was not merely a ‘defective’ appeal as it was not maintainable in 
its very inception. 
7.	
In this regard, the limitation prescribed under Section 61(2) of the 
Code assumes importance. In terms thereof, an appeal before the 
NCLAT must be filed within the time frames fixed thereunder. The 
normal period of limitation prescribed under Section 61(2) is 30 days 
but the proviso thereto permits the NCLAT to condone the delay of 
up to 15 days, if sufficient cause is shown for not filing the appeal 
within the prescribed period of 30 days. Notably, no discretion is left 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
151
Nitendra Kumar Tomer, Suspended Director, Ambro Asia  
Private Limited v. Unox S.P.A. and Another
in the NCLAT to condone delay beyond the prescribed condonable 
period of 15 days. This being the legal position, the indulgence shown 
by the NCLAT on 12.08.2025 completely desecrated the aforestated 
statutory prescription. 
8.	
Nitendra Kumar Tomer, the suspended director of the corporate 
debtor, could have filed an appeal against the admission order 
dated 18.04.2024 only within the limitation period prescribed under 
Section 61(2) of the Code. The misconceived appeal filed by him 
in the name of the corporate debtor, Ambro Asia Private Limited, 
professing to be its director and authorized representative, was wholly 
incompetent and was not an appeal with a ‘curable’ defect, which 
could have been attended to at a later point of time. It was, therefore, 
not open to the said suspended director to seek modification of the 
cause title in this incompetent appeal. Unfortunately, the NCLAT lost 
sight of this aspect and treated the wholly incompetent appeal as 
a merely defective one, whereby it deemed it appropriate to grant 
time to the suspended director to amend the memo of the appeal. 
Once the prescribed limitation period under Section 61(2) expired, 
it was not open to the suspended director to take steps to convert 
the incompetent appeal and maintain an appeal in his own name 
in August, 2025, long after expiry of the prescribed limitation. The 
NCLAT ought not to have permitted him to do so, whereby a time-
barred appeal in the name of the suspended director was presented 
and entertained. 
9.	
Though, the learned senior counsel appearing for the suspended 
director placed reliance on case law in support of his contention that 
the NCLAT was justified in permitting the amendment of the memo of 
appeal, we find the decisions relied upon to be wholly inapplicable. 
In Uday Shankar Triyar vs. Ram Kalewar Prasad Singh and 
another2, this Court was dealing with a defective appeal, wherein 
two appellants were shown in the appeal memo but the vakalatnama 
was signed by only one of them. The High Court permitted the 
other appellant to come on record and pursue the appeal before 
the appellate Court. The said decision was subjected to challenge 
before this Court. In this context, this Court observed that any defect 
in signing the memorandum of appeal or any defect in the authority 
2	
(2006) 1 SCC 75

152
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the person signing the memorandum of appeal or the omission to 
file the vakalatnama executed by the appellant along with the appeal 
would not invalidate the memorandum of appeal, if such omission 
or defect is not deliberate. These observations were made in the 
context of an omission or defect, being one relatable to procedure 
which could be corrected subsequently. As already noted, the appeal 
in the case on hand was not a merely defective appeal but a wholly 
incompetent appeal, having been presented in the name of the 
corporate debtor by a suspended director even though he had no 
right to file such an appeal after the interim resolution professional 
was appointed. Therefore, the observations in the aforestated decision 
have no application. 
10.	 In Varun Pahwa vs. Renu Chaudhary3, the plaint was not properly 
drafted inasmuch as, in the memo of parties, the plaintiff was 
described as Varun Pahwa through director of Siddharth Garments 
Private Limited, though it should have read as Siddharth Garments 
Private Limited through its director, Varun Pahwa. Holding this to 
be an inadvertent mistake in the plaint, which the trial Court should 
have allowed to be corrected so as to permit the company to sue 
as a plaintiff, this Court set aside the order declining to correct the 
memo of parties. Reference was made to the earlier decision in 
Uday Shankar Triyar (supra), wherein it was held that procedural 
defects and irregularities which are curable should not be allowed to 
defeat substantive rights or to cause injustice. Significantly, this Court 
had also observed therein that non-compliance with any procedural 
requirement relating to a pleading, memorandum of appeal or 
application or petition for relief should not entail automatic dismissal 
or rejection, unless the relevant statute or rule so mandates.
11.	 Presently, we find that the appeal, as framed and filed in the name 
of the corporate debtor by a suspended director claiming to be 
its authorized representative, was contrary to the mandate of the 
Code and was, therefore, not at all maintainable. Permitting it to be 
converted to an appeal by the suspended director at a later point 
of time, throwing the prescription of limitation to the winds, was a 
further violation of the Code. The question of rectifying or modifying 
a wholly incompetent appeal in violation of the mandate of the Code 
3	
(2019) 15 SCC 628

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
153
Nitendra Kumar Tomer, Suspended Director, Ambro Asia  
Private Limited v. Unox S.P.A. and Another
did not arise and the NCLAT, therefore, ought not to have extended 
indulgence in that regard. Varun Pahwa (supra), therefore, does not 
further the appellant’s case.
12.	 Lastly, reliance is placed on Innovators Cleantech Pvt. Ltd. vs. 
Pasari Multi Projects Pvt. Ltd.4. This was a case involving defects 
in an appeal filed before the NCLAT and the curing of such defects 
within the time prescribed under the rules. This decision also does 
not further the case of the appellant, as we have already held that 
this was not a defective appeal that the NCLAT was dealing with 
but a wholly incompetent appeal.
13.	 Though, the order dated 12.08.2025 passed by the NCLAT and its 
later order dated 29.08.2025, permitting the amendment of the appeal, 
were not subjected to challenge by Unox S.P.A., the operational 
creditor, or by Piyush Moona, the Interim Resolution Professional, 
we are of the opinion that, despite such failure on their part, we must 
give primacy to the provisions of the Code, which lay down strict 
mandates in terms of time, which are sacrosanct and cannot be 
lightly discarded. Therefore, notwithstanding the aforestated orders 
attaining finality, the legal position obtaining under the Code is that 
the appeal, as framed and filed, was not maintainable being wholly 
incompetent and it could not have been converted into a ‘maintainable 
appeal’ after expiry of the period of limitation under Section 61(2) of 
the Code. The NCLAT erred grievously in permitting such an exercise 
to be undertaken and adjudicating the appeal on merits thereafter. 
Though the decision finally rendered by the NCLAT in the said appeal 
went against the suspended director, whereby he is now before this 
Court, we are not prepared to look into the merits of the said order, 
as the said appeal ought not to have been entertained.
The appeal is dismissed on the aforestated grounds. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
4	
2024 SCC OnLine NCLAT 909
