[2026] 5 S.C.R. 86 : 2026 INSC 342
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (MSEDCL) & Ors. 
v. 
R Z Malpani
(Civil Appeal No. 4307 of 2026)
09 April 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari* and Atul S. Chandurkar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether, on a prima facie view, there exists an arbitration 
agreement between the parties and as such, whether the reference 
to arbitration u/s.11 by the High Court warrants interference by 
this Court.
Headnotes†
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.7 – Arbitration 
Agreement – General reference in the letter of intent to 
an arbitration clause contained in the tender documents 
does not have the effect of ‘incorporation’ of the arbitration 
clause contained therein in the contract – High Court on 
application filed by the Respondent u/s.11, appointed a 
sole arbitrator to adjudicate upon the disputes between the 
parties – Respondent’s case is that the Letter of Intent (LOI) 
incorporated the arbitration agreement from the terms of the 
tender documents – It is the admitted case of the parties that 
pursuant to the LOI and in terms of the tender documents, 
neither any work order was issued to the Respondent nor 
any formal agreement was entered into between the parties – 
Appellant contended inter alia that even assuming that the LOI 
itself can be considered a source of binding legal relationship 
between the parties, the LOI made a general reference to the 
tender documents and such a general reference cannot have 
the effect of ‘incorporation’ of the arbitration clause contained 
therein, in light of s.7(5):
Held: Impugned order set aside – Arbitration clause contained in 
some document may be incorporated in the contract between the 
parties only by a specific reference to the arbitration clause – The 
* Author

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
87
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
intent of the parties to incorporate the arbitration clause has to 
be explicitly clear and a mere general ‘reference’ to the tender 
conditions would not suffice – Present is a case of ‘reference’ 
and not ‘incorporation’ – There is no mention of any arbitration or 
dispute resolution clause in the LOI itself, neither does it purport 
specific incorporation thereof from the tender documents – As 
such, the arbitration clause contained in the  tender documents 
could not be said to have been incorporated in the LOI to evince 
the existence of an arbitration agreement between the parties on 
its conjoint reading with the tender documents – The scope of 
inquiry at the stage of s.11 is extremely limited and only pertains 
to an examination about prima facie existence of an arbitration 
agreement – Courts should follow the principle of ‘When in doubt, 
do refer’ and lean towards referring matters to arbitration when 
the arbitration agreement is prima facie existent – However, it 
is only in the rarest of rare cases where even on a prima facie 
view, without going into disputed facts between the parties, there 
appears to be no existence of arbitration agreement between the 
parties, the Court can reject the application for appointment of an 
arbitrator and reference of the parties to arbitration – The instant 
case is a fit case where even without going into the disputed 
facts and merely on a prima facie view of the matter, there is no 
existence of arbitration agreement – Moreover, LOI in the instant 
case was indicative of a preliminary document in course of the 
contract and was not intended to be an end-all-be-all contract 
between the parties, it did not create contractual obligations or 
legal relationship between them. [Paras 38, 39, 41, 42]
Letter of Intent (LOI) – Does not, in and of itself, create a legal 
relationship or contractual obligations until there is a clear, 
unambiguous final acceptance by parties – High Court inter 
alia found that the offer made by the Respondent in response 
to the Tender was accepted by the LOI which resulted in a duly 
concluded contract and; existence of arbitration agreement 
can be discerned from correspondence between the parties:
Held: Finding of the High Court that Appellant in its reply to the 
Respondent’s arbitration notice ‘did not question the formation of 
arbitration agreement on any ground other than the fact that the 
project did not proceed further’ is prima facie erroneous and is set 
aside – Therefore, there is no admission of any concluded contract, 

88
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
much less an arbitration agreement between the parties by the 
Appellant in its reply – Appellant throughout maintained that there 
was no concluded contract between the parties and as such, no 
reference to arbitration can be made u/cl.23 of Special Conditions 
of Contract contained in the tender documents merely because of 
a general reference to the tender documents in the LOI – Further, 
a letter of intent does not, in and of itself, create a legal relationship 
or contractual obligations until there is a clear, unambiguous final 
acceptance by the parties – When the intent of the parties can be 
evinced from the letter of intent or the tender specifications and it 
is clear that the letter of intent is to be followed by a final award or 
a concluded agreement, it cannot be said that the letter of intent 
itself binds the parties to the terms of the tender – Contractual 
obligations cannot be foisted upon a party without a clear indication 
of its intent to enter into a binding concluded contract – LOI in the 
facts of the instant case was a promise to make a promise and 
not a promise itself and no agreement had concluded between the 
parties – It contemplated a work order to be issued at a subsequent 
stage – Neither the specifications of the tender documents, nor the 
LOI provides that the LOI itself would result in a concluded contract 
– The intent behind the LOI is explicitly clarified as merely to ensure 
that preliminaries are complied with so that the work may begin 
upon issuance of a work order – From a holistic reading of the 
tender documents, the LOI and other subsequent communication 
between the parties, the LOI does not evince the commercial 
intention of the Appellant to create a binding legal relationship, it 
informs the Respondent that the work was entrusted to them upon 
opening of bids and lays down preliminary conditions to be fulfilled 
in contemplation of a future work order and agreement in order to 
ensure that prior to the work order being issued, everything is set 
in place and the work may begin at once upon such issuance – 
On facts, LOI did not have the effect of creating a binding legal 
relationship between the parties – Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996. [Paras 29, 31, 33-36]
Words and Phrases – “Tender” – “Letter of Intent”:
Held: Letter of Intent is an expression of one party’s intent to enter 
into a contract with the other party in the forthcoming future – When 
the intent of the parties can be evinced from the letter of intent or 
the tender specifications and it is clear that the letter of intent is to 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
89
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
be followed by a final award or a concluded agreement, it cannot 
be said that the letter of intent itself binds the parties to the terms 
of the tender – Contractual obligations cannot be foisted upon a 
party without a clear indication of its intent to enter into a binding 
concluded contract – Therefore, what needs to be distinguished 
is whether the intent of the parties is to make a ‘promise’ or a 
‘promise to make a promise’ – A tender is essentially in the nature 
of an ‘invitation to offer’ and submission of a bid by the tenderer 
is an ‘offer’ – By means of a letter of intent, however, it must be 
examined by the Court whether the party extending the letter of 
intent is in consensus ad idem with the other party and intends to 
create a conclusive and binding agreement. [Para 31]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Scope of examination 
at the stage of s.11 proceedings – Discussed. 
Case Law Cited
State of Himachal Pradesh and Anr. v. OASYS Cybernatics Pvt. 
Ltd., 2025 INSC 1355 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2536; South Eastern 
Coalfields Limited and Ors. v. S. Kumar’s Associates AKM (JV) 
[2021] 8 SCR 8 : (2021) 9 SCC 166; NBCC (India) Ltd. v. Zillion 
Infraprojects Pvt. Ltd. [2024] 3 SCR 812 : (2024) 7 SCC 174; Office 
for Alternative Architecture v. Ircon Infrastructure and Services 
Ltd. [2025] 6 SCR 395 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1098; Maharshi 
Dayanand University v. Anand Coop. L/C Society Ltd. [2006] Supp. 
8 SCR 105 : (2007) 5 SCC 295; UNISSI (India) (P) Ltd. v. Post 
Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research [2008] 14 
SCR 108 : 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1815 : (2009) 1 SCC 107; Vidya 
Drolia & Ors. v. Durga Trading Corporation [2020] 11 SCR 1001 : 
(2021) 2 SCC 1; NTPC Ltd. v. SPML Infra Ltd. [2023] 2 SCR 846 : 
(2023) 9 SCC 385; SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Krish Spg. 
[2024] 7 SCR 840 : (2024) 12 SCC 1; Interplay Between Arbitration 
Agreements under Arbitration Act, 1996 & Stamp Act, 1899, In re. 
[2023] 15 SCR 1081 : (2024) 6 SCC 1; Govind Rubber Ltd. v. 
Louis Dreyfus Commodities Asia (P) Ltd. [2014] 12 SCR 488 : 
(2015) 13 SCC 477; M.R. Engineers & Contractors (P) Ltd. v. 
Som Datt Builders Ltd. [2009] 10 SCR 373 : (2009) 7 SCC 696; 
Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables Ltd. [2018] 1 SCR 86 : (2018) 2 
SCC 519 – referred to.
Glencore International AG v. Shree Ganesh Metals, 2025 SCC 
OnLine SC 1815 – held not applicable.

90
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
List of Acts
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
List of Keywords
General reference in letter of intent to an arbitration clause 
contained in tender documents not sufficient for its incorporation 
in the contract; No arbitration agreement between parties; No 
existence of arbitration agreement; Arbitration clause contained 
in Tender documents not incorporated in Letter of Intent (LOI); 
‘reference’; ‘incorporation’; Incorporation of arbitration clauses 
contained in tender documents by means of reference in letter of 
intent; No admission of any concluded contract; Letter of intent; 
LOI did not create a binding legal relationship between parties; No 
concluded contract between parties; No reference to arbitration 
can be made; Special Conditions of Contract in Tender documents; 
Tender documents along with LOI not sufficient to form a valid 
contract or arbitration agreement; No work order issued; Scope of 
inquiry at the stage of Section 11, Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996; Examination about prima facie existence of an arbitration 
agreement; No mention of any arbitration or dispute resolution 
clause in LOI.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4307  
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.10.2025 of the 
High Court of Judicature at Bombay in ARBA(L) No. 1417 of  
2025.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Vikas Singh, Sr. Adv., Samir Malik, Tushar Mathur, Mahip Singh 
Sikarwar, Ms. Snehal Kaila, Ms. Yachana Gupta, Ms. Deepeika 
Kalia, Deepanshu Shakargaye, Sudeep Chandra, Ms. Khushi, 
Samir Malik.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Abhijit A. Desai, Satyajit A. Desai, Parth Johari, Parth Kumar 
Singh, Satya Kam Sharma.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
91
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.K. Maheshwari, J. 
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The instant appeal is directed against the judgment dated 01.10.2025 
of the Bombay High Court (hereinafter referred to as “High Court”) 
in Arbitration Application (L) No. 1417 of 2025.
3.	
By the impugned order, the High Court disposed of the application 
filed by the Respondent under Section 11 of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as “1996 Act”) and 
appointed a sole arbitrator to adjudicate upon the disputes and 
differences between the parties.
FACTS
4.	
The Appellant, Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company 
Limited (MSEDCL) is a State Government company, which is a fully-
owned corporate entity owned by the Government of Maharashtra. 
It is an electricity distribution utility which distributes electricity 
throughout Maharashtra including a few suburbs of Mumbai. The 
Respondent is a partnership firm engaged in civil construction and 
other allied businesses. 
5.	
The Appellant floated a Tender dated 11.08.2021 bearing Code 
EEC/BND/TECH/42/21-22 for ‘Civil & Interior work – Providing / 
renovating 134 CFC Centres at various O&M Divisions of SEDCL 
throughout the State’. (hereinafter referred to as the “Tender”) 
Total estimated cost of the tender was ₹17,41,37,020. The Tender 
document contained four different constituents, being (i) Instructions 
to Tenderers & Qualifying Criteria (ii) General Specifications 
(iii) Technical Specifications (iv) Special Conditions of Contract. 
(collectively referred to as “Tender documents”) The Tender 
documents also contained an agreement pro-forma. The timeline 
for the tender process as per the Tender documents was as 
follows:

92
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Particulars
Date / Time
Bid Start Date
15.07.2011, 13:00
Bid End Date
06.08.2021, 11:30
Techno-commercial Bid opening
18.08.2021, 15:00
Price Bid opening on
Will be declared later
Winner Selection Date
18.08.2021, 15:30
6.	
The Respondent participated in the tender process and submitted a 
bank guarantee of ₹17,45,100 valid up to 06.03.2022. Respondent 
then submitted its bid/quotation against the said Tender with a validity 
of 120 days on 03.09.2021. Upon opening of the techno-commercial 
and price bids, the Appellant, vide letter bearing No. CEC/CCO/
Tech/350 dated 16.11.2022 (hereinafter referred to as “LOI”) accepted 
the bid of the Respondent and entrusted the work under the said 
tender process to the Respondent for a value of ₹17,76,19,699.
7.	
On 29.11.2022, the Respondent furnished a further bank guarantee 
to the tune of ₹44,40,500 as security deposit valid up to 27.05.2023. 
The Appellant wrote to the Respondent on 13.12.2022 requesting 
that bank guarantee be furnished on stamp paper of ₹500 value 
instead of ₹100 and sent a reminder in that respect on 31.12.2022. 
The Respondent submitted revised bank guarantee on stamp paper 
with value of ₹500 on 31.01.2023. 
8.	
On 02.02.2023, the Holding Company of the Appellant wrote to 
the Executive Engineer of the Appellant seeking correction in 
the forwarding letter of the bank guarantees. Pursuant thereto, 
the Respondent sent a corrected forwarding letter with the bank 
guarantees on 06.02.2023.
9.	
Thereafter, the Respondent sent various letters and representations 
to the Appellant seeking issuance of a Work Order in terms of the 
LOI, but no Work Order was issued by the Appellant. On 08.08.2023, 
the Respondent submitted revised / renewed bank guarantees as 
security deposit.
10.	 Despite repeated requests being made by the Respondent, the Work 
Order was not issued by the Appellant and ultimately, on 05.08.2024, 
the Respondent terminated the contract, citing Appellant’s failure to 
hand over the sites for the work to begin. Thereafter, on 30.08.2024, 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
93
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
the Respondent issued a notice under Clause 23 of the Special 
Conditions of Contract in the Tender documents, seeking reference 
of the disputes to arbitration and seeking compensation to the tune 
of ₹4,89,85,500.
11.	 On 27.09.2024, the Appellant formally cancelled the Tender and EMD, 
Security Deposit submitted by the Respondent was duly refunded 
on 24.10.2024. It is pertinent that the cancellation itself was not 
challenged by the Respondent availing public law remedies and 
instead, the Respondent chose to pursue its remedy by means of 
arbitration under the Tender documents.
12.	 On 01.10.2024, the Respondent again invoked the arbitration 
agreement contained in Clause 23 of the Special Conditions of Contract 
in the Tender documents. On 04.11.2024, the Appellant replied to the 
Respondent’s arbitration notice and specifically stated therein that 
Tender documents along with LOI are not sufficient to form a valid 
contract or arbitration agreement. On 06.11.2024 and 03.12.2024, the 
Appellant informed the Respondent that since the EMD and Security 
Deposit has been refunded, no claims or dues are pending.
13.	 At this stage, the Respondent filed an application under Section 11 
of the 1996 Act before the High Court being Arbitration Application 
No. 1417 of 2025, seeking appointment of an arbitrator. Notice was 
issued by the High Court on 21.01.2025 and service was complete, 
but on 26.06.2025 and 17.07.2025, the Appellant did not appear 
before the High Court. The High Court vide the impugned ex-parte 
order on 01.10.2025 appointed one Mr. Drupad Patil, Advocate 
as the Sole Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the 
parties.
FINDINGS OF THE HIGH COURT 
14.	 The High Court found that the offer made by the Respondent in 
response to the Tender was accepted by the LOI dated 16.11.2022 
which resulted in a duly concluded contract. Existence of arbitration 
agreement can be discerned from correspondence between the 
parties and the scope of enquiry in Section 11 proceedings is 
limited to examining the existence of a valid arbitration agreement. 
It was observed by the High Court that Appellant in their reply to 
the arbitration notice has not denied the existence of an arbitration 
agreement, hence directed appointment of an arbitrator.

94
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED
15.	 Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel for the Appellants has 
vehemently argued that there exists no concluded contract between 
the parties, much less an arbitration agreement under the meaning 
of Section 7 of the 1996 Act, and as such, the High Court has erred 
in directing appointment of an arbitrator. He submitted the impugned 
order is patently erroneous in recording that the Appellant had not 
disputed the existence of an arbitration agreement in their reply to 
the notice under Section 21 of the 1996 Act. Drawing our attention to 
the letter dated 04.11.2024 of the Appellant, it is stated that a specific 
plea was taken about non-existence of arbitration agreement at the 
very first instance by the Appellant. He further submitted that in the 
absence of a concluded contract between the parties, there can be 
no question of existence of an arbitration agreement complying with 
Section 7 of the 1996 Act. In reference to the Tender documents with 
the LOI, it is submitted that looking to the material does not evince 
a concluded contract since the LOI itself is contingent in nature, it 
provides that a detailed Work Order and formal agreement was to 
follow and as such it is a precursor to a contract and not the contract 
itself. He has placed reliance on the recent judgement of this Court 
in State of Himachal Pradesh and Anr. v. OASYS Cybernatics 
Pvt. Ltd.1 and the judgement of South Eastern Coalfields Limited 
and Ors. v. S. Kumar’s Associates AKM (JV)2 in support of this 
argument.
16.	 The Appellant has argued that, assuming arguendo, even if the 
LOI is construed to be a contract creating legal relationship, mere 
reference in the LOI to the terms of the Tender documents would 
not have the effect of importing the arbitration clause as contained 
therein. Further, learned senior counsel has drawn our attention 
to the judgement of this Court in NBCC (India) Ltd. v. Zillion 
Infraprojects Pvt. Ltd.3 to submit that mere reference to another 
document containing an arbitration clause is not sufficient unless 
the arbitration clause is specifically incorporated in the subsequent 
document. He has submitted, therefore, that the instant appeal 
1	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2536.
2	
(2021) 9 SCC 166.
3	
(2024) 7 SCC 174.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
95
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
deserves to be allowed and the impugned order passed by the High 
Court warrants interference by this Court.
17.	 Appearing for the Respondents, learned counsel Mr. Abhijit A. Desai 
has argued with equal force that the instant appeal warrants dismissal 
since an order appointing an arbitrator is final and non-appealable 
as per Section 11(7) of the 1996 Act. He submits that this Court in a 
special leave petition arising out of such appointment, must exercise 
caution while interfering against appointment of an arbitrator and the 
tribunal has the jurisdiction to decide on its jurisdiction under Section 
16 of the 1996 Act in light of the principle of Kompetenz-Kompetenz. 
He has submitted that the instant case is a feeble attempt at delaying 
arbitration proceedings by the Appellant who has chosen not to appear 
before the High Court despite adequate service of notice. He has 
further argued that the existence of an arbitration agreement is clear 
from a conjoint reading of: (i) Clause 23 of the Special Conditions 
of the Tender documents; (ii) Respondent’s bid dated 03.09.2021; 
(iii) LOI dated 16.11.2022 accepting the Respondent’s bid. It is 
submitted that furnishing and repeated renewal of bank guarantees 
by the Appellant, exchange of correspondence regarding renewal 
of bank guarantees would further show that there was a concluded 
contract between the parties. 
18.	 Since an arbitration agreement can be formed by exchange of 
communication under Section 7(4)(b) of the 1996 Act, a formally 
executed commercial contract is not necessary and tender conditions 
containing an arbitration clause, once accepted and acted upon, 
form a valid arbitration agreement under Section 7 of the 1996 Act. 
Learned counsel has placed reliance on the judgement of this Court 
in Office for Alternative Architecture v. Ircon Infrastructure and 
Services Ltd.4 to argue that the scope of scrutiny by the Court in an 
application under Section 11 of the 1996 Act is circumscribed by sub-
section (6A) thereto and as such, unnecessary judicial interference 
in arbitration proceedings is not warranted. Since the question 
relates to formation of the contract, it must be left to the arbitrator 
to decide in an application under Section 16 of the 1996 Act as held 
by this Court in Maharshi Dayanand University v. Anand Coop. 
4	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1098.

96
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
L/C Society Ltd.5 Much emphasis has been laid on the judgement 
of this Court in UNISSI (India) (P) Ltd. v. Post Graduate Institute 
of Medical Education and Research6 to argue that where the 
tender conditions contain an arbitration clause and the tender has 
been acted upon by the parties, it cannot be said that there existed 
no concluded contract and consequently, no arbitration agreement. 
Lastly, it has been submitted that cancellation of the tender itself 
does not extinguish the arbitration agreement between the parties 
and the said cancellation is a subject matter of arbitration. As such, 
he has urged that the instant appeal warrants dismissal.
ANALYSIS
19.	 After hearing learned counsel for the parties and having gone 
through the documents on record, the short question which falls for 
our consideration in the instant appeal is whether, on a prima facie 
view, there exists an arbitration agreement between the parties and 
as such, whether the reference to arbitration under Section 11 by 
the High Court warrants interference by this Court?
20.	 The law on appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11 of the 1996 
Act has undergone windfall change in the recent years, especially 
after the insertion of sub-section 6A therein w.e.f. 23.10.2015 which 
confines the Court’s jurisdiction to the examination of existence of an 
arbitration agreement. Initially, this Court in Vidya Drolia & Ors. v. 
Durga Trading Corporation,7 had developed what came to be 
known as the ‘ex-facie’ test, holding in clear terms that while scope 
of judicial review and interference by Courts at the Section 11 stage 
is extremely limited, the Courts may interfere where it is ‘manifestly 
and ex-facie certain that the arbitration agreement is non-existent, 
invalid or the disputes are non-arbitrable’. The ‘eye of the needle’ 
test was propounded by the judgement of this Court in NTPC Ltd. v. 
SPML Infra Ltd.8 to hold that limited scrutiny at the pre-arbitral stage 
by the referral court through the ‘eye of the needle’ must be done in 
order to protect the parties from being forced to arbitrate a matter 
which is demonstrably non-arbitrable. Subsequently, however, a co-
5	
(2007) 5 SCC 295.
6	
(2009) 1 SCC 107.
7	
(2021) 2 SCC 1.
8	
(2023) 9 SCC 385.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
97
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
ordinate bench of this Court in SBI General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Krish Spg.,9 relying on the seven-judge bench decision in Interplay 
Between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration Act, 1996 & 
Stamp Act, 1899, In re,10 has held that the ‘ex-facie meritless’ and 
‘eye of the needle’ tests cannot be said to be in conformity with 
the principles of modern arbitration and they would not apply after 
the decision of the seven-judge bench, since even though they 
endeavour to minimise judicial interference, yet require the Courts 
to enter into a factual examination of contested facts and evidence, 
however minimal. Relevant portion of the judgement in SBI General 
Insurance Co. Ltd. is quoted herein for reference:
“114. In view of the observations made by this Court 
in In Re : Interplay (supra), it is clear that the scope of 
enquiry at the stage of appointment of arbitrator is limited 
to the scrutiny of prima facie existence of the arbitration 
agreement, and nothing else. For this reason, we find it 
difficult to hold that the observations made in Vidya Drolia 
(supra) and adopted in NTPC v. SPML (supra) that the 
jurisdiction of the referral court when dealing with the issue 
of “accord and satisfaction” under Section 11 extends to 
weeding out ex-facie non -arbitrable and frivolous disputes 
would continue to apply despite the subsequent decision 
in In Re : Interplay (supra).
….
118. Tests like the “eye of the needle” and “ex-facie 
meritless”, although try to minimise the extent of judicial 
interference, yet they require the referral court to examine 
contested facts and appreciate prima facie evidence 
(however limited the scope of enquiry may be) and thus are 
not in conformity with the principles of modern arbitration 
which place arbitral autonomy and judicial non-interference 
on the highest pedestal.”
21.	 As such, the pronouncement of this Court in SBI General Insurance 
Co. Ltd. (Supra) lays down a clear and comprehensive explanation 
about the scope of examination at the stage of Section11 proceedings: 
9	
(2024) 12 SCC 1.
10	
(2024) 6 SCC 1.

98
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
it is limited to finding a prima facie existence of arbitration agreement 
and nothing beyond it. Questions of ‘accord and satisfaction’, 
limitation, dishonesty and frivolity, arbitrability of the subject-matter 
are to be left to the adjudication by the arbitral tribunal under Section 
16 of the 1996 Act which is a reflection of the doctrine of ‘Kompetenz-
Kompetenz’ or ‘compétence de la compétence’. It is therefore 
incumbent upon us to only examine the prima facie existence of an 
arbitration agreement.
22.	 At the outset, it would be apposite to extract the arbitration agreement 
purportedly contained in Clause 23 of the Special Conditions of 
Contract in the Tender documents. It reads as thus:
“23. Arbitration Clause:
a. The matters to be determine by the Chief Engineer:
All disputes and differences of any kind whatsoever 
arising out of or in connection with the contract, whether 
during the progress of the work or after its completion and 
whether before or after the determination of the contract 
shall be referred by the contractor to the C. E. and the C. 
E. shall [within 120 days) after receipt of the contractor’s 
representation make and notify decisions of all matters 
referred to by the contractor in writing.
b. Demand for Arbitration:
i) In the event of any dispute or difference between the 
parties hereto as to the construction or operation of this 
contract, or the respective rights and liabilities of the parties 
on any matter in question, the dispute or difference on 
any account or as to the withholding by M.S.E.D.C.LTD. 
of any certificate to which the contractor may claim to be 
entitled to or if the C. E. fails to make a decision (within 
120 days), then and in any such case, the contractor (after 
120 days) but within (180 days) of his presenting his final 
claim on disputed matters, shall demand in writing that the 
dispute or difference to be referred to arbitration.
ii) The demand for arbitration shall specify the matters which 
are in question, or subject of the dispute or difference as 
also the amount of claim item wise. Only such dispute(s) 
or difference(s) in respect of which the demand has 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
99
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
been made, together with counter claims or set off, shall 
be referred to arbitration and other matters shall not be 
included in the reference.
a) The arbitration proceedings shall be assumed to 
have commenced from the day, a written and valid 
demand for arbitration is received by the Company.
b) The claimant shall submit his claim stating the 
facts supporting the claims along with all relevant 
documents and the relief or remedy sought against 
each claim Within a period of 30 days from the date 
of appointment of the Arbitral Tribunal.
c) The Company shall submit its defense statement 
and counter claim(s), if any, within a period of 60 
days of receipt of copy of claims from the Tribunal 
thereafter unless otherwise extension has been 
granted by the Tribunal.
iii) No new claim shall be added during the proceedings by 
either party. However, a party may amend or supplement 
the original claim or defense thereof during the course of 
arbitration proceedings subject to acceptance by Tribunal 
having due regard to the delay in making it. 
iv) If the contractor(s) does/do not prefer his/their specific 
and final claims in writing, within a period of 90 days 
of receiving the intimation from the Company, that the 
final bill is ready for payment, he/they will be deemed to 
have waived his/their claim(s) and the Company shall be 
discharged and released of all liabilities under the contract 
in respect of these claims. 
c. Obligation during pendency of Arbitration:
Work under the contract shall, unless otherwise directed by 
the Engineer, continue during the arbitration proceedings, 
and no payment due or payable by the Company shall 
be withheld on account of such proceedings, provided, 
however, it shall be open for Arbitral Tribunal to consider 
and decide whether or not such work should be continued 
during arbitration proceedings.

100
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
In cases where the total value of all claims in question 
added together does not exceed Rs.1,00,00,000/- (Rs. 
One Crore) the Arbitrate Tribunal shall consist of a Sole 
Arbitrator who shall be either the C.E. of the Company 
or serving or retired officer of the Company/Government 
not below the grade of C.E. or equivalent nominated by 
the Chairman of the Company in that behalf. The Sole 
Arbitrator shall be appointed within 60 days from the day 
when a written and valid demand for arbitration is received 
by the Company.
i) In cases the value of the claim exceeds Rs. 1,00,00,000/- 
(Rs. One Crore) as above, the Arbitral Tribunal shall consist 
of panel of 3 serving or retired officers of M.S.E.D.C.LTD./
Govt not below the grade of C.E./CA.O. as the Arbitrators. 
For this purpose, the Company will send a panel of more 
than 3 names of arbitrators of one or more department of 
the Company/Govt. to the contractor who will be asked to 
suggest to the Chairman at least 2 names for appointment 
as contractor’s nominee. The Chairman shall appoint at 
least one of them as the contractor’s nominee and will 
also appoint the balance number of arbitrators either from 
the panel or from outside the panel, duly indicating the 
presiding arbitrator from amongst the three [3) arbitrators 
so appointed. While nominating arbitrators, it will be 
necessary to ensure that one of them is or has worked 
in Accounts department.
ii) If one or more arbitrators appointed as above refuses to 
act as arbitrator, withdraws from his office as arbitrator or 
vacates his/their office/offices or is/are unable or unwilling 
to perform his functions as arbitrator for any reason 
whatsoever or dies or in the opinion of the Chairman fails 
to act without undue delay. The Chairman shall appoint 
new arbitrators to act in his/their place in the same manner 
in which the earlier arbitrator/s had been appointed. Such 
reconstituted Tribunal, may, as its discretion proceed with 
the reference from the stage at which it was left by the 
previous arbitrator(s). 
iii) The Tribunal shall have powers to call for such evidence 
by way of affidavits or otherwise as the Arbitral Tribunal 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
101
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
shall think proper, and it shall be the duty of the parties 
hereto to do or cause to be done all such things as may 
be necessary to enable the Arbitral Tribunal to make the 
award without any delay.
iv) While appointing arbitrator(s) as above, due care 
shall be taken that he/they is/are not the one/those who 
had an opportunity to deal with the matters to which 
the contract relates or who in the course of his/their 
duties as Company’s servant(s) expressed views on all 
or any of the matters under dispute or differences. The 
proceedings or the Arbitral Tribunal or the award made 
by such Tribunal will, however, not be invalid merely for 
the reason that one or more arbitrator had, in the course 
of his service, opportunity to deal with the matters to 
which the contract relates or who in the course of his/their 
duties expressed views on all or any of the matters under  
dispute.
v) Arbitral award shall state item wise, the sum and reasons 
upon which it is based.
vi) A party may apply for corrections of any computational 
errors, any typographical or clerical errors or any other error 
of similar nature occurring in the award and interpretation 
of specific point of award to tribunal within 30 days of 
receipt of the award. 
vii) A party may apply to Tribunal within 30 days of receipt of 
award to make an additional award as to claims presented 
in the arbitral proceedings, but omitted from the arbitral 
award. 
viii) In case of the Tribunal, comprising of three members 
any ruling or award shall be made by a majority of Members 
of Tribunal. In the absence of such a majority, the views 
of the Presiding Arbitrator shall prevail.
ix) Where the arbitral award is for payment of money, 
no interest shall be payable on whole or any part of the 
money for any period till the date on which the award is  
made.

102
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
x) The cost of the arbitration shall be borne equally by the 
respective parties. The cost shall inter-alia include fees of 
the arbitrators as per the rates fixed by the Company from 
time to time. Provided that the fees payable per arbitrator for 
claims up to Rs. One Crore, shall not exceed Rs. 2000/- per 
sitting subject to a maximum of Rs. 25,000/- and the fees 
payable per arbitrator for claims over Rs. One Crore, shall 
not exceed Rs. 2000/- per sitting subject to a maximum 
of Rs. 50,000/-. Provided further that the arbitrators who 
are in service of Govt/M.S.E.D.C. LTD. shall draw fees at 
half of the rates mentioned above.
xi) Company shall maintain a list of arbitrators. The 
Chairman shall have full powers to delete or add the name 
of the arbitrators in the list or to make amendments to the 
said list as per his discretion. 
xii) The arbitral proceedings should be completed and 
the award be finalized within one year ff om the date of 
appointment of arbitrators. 
xiii) Subject to the provisions as aforesaid, Arbitration & 
Conciliation Act,1996 and the rules there under, and any 
statutory notification thereof shall apply to the arbitration 
proceedings under this clause.” 
23.	 The ‘Instructions to Tenderers’ contained in the Tender documents at 
Clause 23 provides that the successful tenderer will have to execute 
an agreement with the Company (Appellant) in the Company’s 
standard proforma. It reads as thus:
“23.0 The successful tenderer will also have to execute 
an agreement with the Company in Company’s standard 
proforma. The cost of stamp paper shall be borne by the 
contractor. (The value of Stamp paper for agreement is 
Rs. 500/- up to ten lakh Plus RS. 100 for every one lakh 
or part there of above Rs Ten Lacks)”
24.	 Clause 42 of the ‘Instructions to Tenderers’ contained in the Tender 
documents provides that in case the work is cancelled before starting 
the work for any reason after placement of work order, only E.M.D. / 
S.D. shall be refunded and no other claim in this respect shall be 
entertained. Clause 39 of the ‘Instructions to Tenderers’ in the Tender 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
103
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
documents provides that the ‘Instructions to Tenderers’ shall form 
part of the contract.
25.	 The entire thrust of the argument of the Respondent is that the 
arbitration clause contained in Clause 23 of the Special Conditions 
of Contract in the Tender documents has been incorporated in the 
contract which has been concluded by the Appellant’s LOI dated 
16.11.2022. The LOI references the Tender documents and in the 
initial paragraphs, provides that the terms and conditions of the 
contract as per the reference documents shall be interpreted by 
reading together with them the terms of the LOI itself and in case 
of conflict, the terms of the LOI shall prevail. The said portion of the 
LOI is quoted herein for reference:
“…
With reference to the above, on behalf of MSEDCL tender 
No. EEC/BND/TECH/T-42/2021-22 is invited for providing / 
renovating the CFC center at various O&M Division of 
MSEDCL throughout the State vide E-Tender Notice PR 
No. 295/2021 dt. 14.7.2021. In this regards the undersigned 
is pleased to inform you that your offer for the above work 
covered under the scope of Schedule-B of the said tender 
has been accepted and work covered under the scope of 
the contract is entrusted to you subject to the following 
terms and conditions.
Notwithstanding that reference are given above, the 
terms and conditions and specifications of contract 
shall be interpreted by reading together the terms and 
conditions, specifications and contents of this Letter of 
intent as below. In case of any deviations with the contents 
of this Letter of intent from corresponding conditions 
in the above said tender specifications or contents 
of the letter under reference as read and interpreted 
up to date, the contents of this Letter of intent shall  
prevail.”
26.	 In the concluding portion of the LOI, it is stated that the LOI has 
been issued to the Respondent to start with preliminaries and to 
start the work on the issuance of the detailed work order. The said 
portion of the LOI is quoted herein for reference:

104
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“…
This letter of intent is issued to enable you to start with 
preliminaries to start the work as soon as the detailed 
work order is issued.
...”
27.	 It is the admitted case of the parties that pursuant to the LOI and in 
terms of Clause 23 of the ‘Instructions to Tenderers’ of the Tender 
documents, neither any work order was issued to the Respondent 
nor any formal agreement was entered into between the parties on 
the proforma of the Appellant. It is therefore required to be examined 
as to whether any agreement to arbitrate has formed at this stage 
in order to meet the requirement of Section 7 of the 1996 Act. The 
said section is relevant for this purpose and is therefore quoted 
below for reference:
“7. Arbitration Agreement:
(1) In this Part, ‘arbitration agreement’ means an agreement 
by the parties to submit to arbitration all or certain disputes 
which have arisen or which may arise between them in 
respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual 
or not.
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an 
arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of a separate 
agreement.
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
(4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in –
(a) a document signed by the parties;
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or 
other means of telecommunications including 
communication through electronic means which 
provide a record of the agreement; or
(c) an exchange of statement of claim and defence 
in which the existence of the agreement is alleged 
by one party and not denied by the other.
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing 
an arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration agreement 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
105
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
if the contract is in writing and the reference is such as to 
make that arbitration clause part of the contract.”
28.	 Section 7(1) of the 1996 Act posits that there must be a defined ‘legal 
relationship’ between the parties and the agreement to arbitrate may 
be contractual or not. As such, conclusion of a contract might not be 
necessary for that purpose and what needs to be seen is whether the 
parties were ad idem in their intention to refer a dispute to arbitration 
as evinced from their communication.11 A distinction, however, is 
drawn when the arbitration agreement is contained in some document 
which is sought to be incorporated within another. Section 7(5) 
is attracted in such a situation and it refers to the incorporation 
of an arbitration agreement contained in some document into a 
‘contract’ which has to be in writing. The use of the word ‘contract’ 
when dealing with incorporation of an arbitration agreement from 
some other document is intentional and consequential. Since in the 
present appeal the Respondent’s case is that the LOI incorporates 
the arbitration agreement from the terms of the Tender documents, 
both the contractual nature of the LOI as well as the validity of 
incorporation becomes relevant for our examination. 
29.	 In this context, at the very threshold it must be observed that the 
finding of the High Court that Appellant in its reply dated 04.11.2024 
to the Respondent’s arbitration notice ‘did not question the formation 
of arbitration agreement on any ground other than the fact that the 
project did not proceed further’ is prima facie erroneous and stares 
at the face of the record, and is liable to be set aside. It has been 
contended in plain terms by the Appellant in its reply dated 04.11.2024 
that there was no concluded contract between the parties and that 
the LOI cannot bind either party to a contract, it is merely indicative 
of a party’s intention to enter into a contract. There is, therefore, 
no admission of any concluded contract, much less an arbitration 
agreement between the parties by the Appellant in its reply dated 
04.11.2024. The Appellant has throughout maintained that there was 
no concluded contract between the parties and as such, no reference 
to arbitration can be made under Clause 23 of Special Conditions 
of Contract contained in the Tender documents merely because of 
a general reference to the Tender documents in the LOI.
11	
Govind Rubber Ltd. v. Louis Dreyfus Commodities Asia (P) Ltd., (2015) 13 SCC 477.

106
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
30.	 A co-ordinate bench of this Court in OASYS Cybernatics (Supra) 
has exhaustively discussed the effect of a letter of intent pursuant 
to a tender, its legal character and the nature of rights flowing 
therefrom. Relevant paragraphs of the said judgement are quoted 
herein for reference:
“11. The first issue that falls for our determination concerns 
the legal character of the LoI dated 02.09.2022 and the 
nature of rights, if any, accrued to the Respondent-company 
thereunder.
12. This question goes to the root of the matter, and is 
not one of mere semantics, i.e. ascertaining whether the 
issuance of the LoI created a concluded contract capable 
of enforcement, or whether it remained a conditional and 
inchoate expression of intent, leaving the Government 
free to reassess its position prior to formal acceptance. 
The answer defines the legal threshold for the Appellant-
State’s power to cancel and the Respondent-company’s 
entitlement to protection.
13. The jurisprudence on the subject is neither nascent nor 
unsettled. A catena of decisions starting from Rajasthan 
Cooperative Dairy Federation Ltd. v. Maha Laxmi 
Mingrate Marketing Service (P) Ltd., through Dresser 
Rand S.A. v. Bindal Agro Chem Ltd., to Level 9 Biz Pvt. 
Ltd. v. HP Housing & Urban Development Authority, this 
Court has consistently held that an LoI is, in the ordinary 
course, a precursor to a contract and not the contract  
itself.
14. In Dresser Rand (supra), it was re-stated with clarity that 
“a letter of intent merely indicates a party’s intention 
to enter into a contract with the other party in future. 
A letter of intent is not intended to bind either party 
ultimately to enter into any contract.” The same principle 
animated Rajasthan Cooperative Dairy Federation (supra), 
where this Court observed that until the offer is accepted 
unconditionally and the preconditions are satisfied, “no 
binding legal relationship” comes into existence. The 
rationale is thus simple but fundamental: the law of contract 
distinguishes between a promise to make a promise and 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
107
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
a promise performed. The former is not legally binding 
until its contingencies are fulfilled.
15. These authorities collectively articulate a coherent 
doctrine: an LoI creates no vested right until it passes the 
threshold of final and unconditional acceptance. It is but a 
“promise in embryo,” capable of maturing into a contract 
only upon the satisfaction of stipulated preconditions or 
upon the issue of an LoA. A bidder’s expectation that such 
a contract will follow may be commercially genuine, but 
it is not a juridical entitlement. To hold otherwise would 
be to bind the State in contract before it has consciously 
chosen to be bound—a proposition foreign to both contract 
law and public administration.
16. Turning then to the LoI before us, its conditionality is 
beyond doubt. As noticed heretofore in para 5.7, it required 
the Respondent-company to:
(i) undertake compatibility testing of its proposed 
ePoS devices at NICSI, Hyderabad;
(ii) provide a live demonstration of the devices with 
NIC’s application before the Directorate at Shimla;
(iii) execute a formal agreement only after successful 
completion of the aforesaid steps; and
(iv) furnish a detailed MRP and landing cost of the 
devices and their major components.
17. Each requirement was framed as a condition precedent; 
the LoI itself stated that a “final award letter” would issue 
only after the successful completion of these tasks. This 
language admits of no ambiguity. The tender architecture 
was sequential: testing, demonstration, acceptance, then 
execution. It was never contemplated that the LoI would 
operate as the contract itself.
18. The cumulative effect of the foregoing analysis is that 
the LoI was no more than a provisional communication 
signifying the Appellant-State›s intent to enter into a 
formal arrangement upon fulfilment of certain technical 
and procedural conditions. The acceptance of tender and 

108
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the consequential formation of a binding contract were 
contingent upon satisfaction of these prerequisites. The 
Respondent-company’s reliance upon the LoI as a source 
of vested contractual rights is, therefore, wholly misplaced.
19. As a result, the First Issue is answered in the 
negative. We have no difficulty in holding that the LoI did 
not give rise to any binding or enforceable rights in favour 
of the Respondent-company.”
31.	 It is settled law that a letter of intent does not, in and of itself, create 
a legal relationship or contractual obligations until there is a clear, 
unambiguous final acceptance by the parties. It is an expression of 
one party’s intent to enter into a contract with the other party in the 
forthcoming future. When the intent of the parties can be evinced 
from the letter of intent or the tender specifications and it is clear that 
the letter of intent is to be followed by a final award or a concluded 
agreement, it cannot be said that the letter of intent itself binds the 
parties to the terms of the tender. Contractual obligations cannot 
be foisted upon a party without a clear indication of its intent to 
enter into a binding concluded contract. Therefore, what needs to 
be distinguished is whether the intent of the parties is to make a 
‘promise’ or a ‘promise to make a promise’. We are mindful of the 
fact that a tender is essentially in the nature of an ‘invitation to offer’ 
and submission of a bid by the tenderer is an ‘offer’. By means of a 
letter of intent, however, it must be examined by the Court whether 
the party extending the letter of intent is in consensus ad idem 
with the other party and intends to create a conclusive and binding 
agreement.
32.	 Further, in South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. (Supra), this Court held 
that the question as to whether a contract had been concluded 
between the parties can be discerned by the notice inviting tender, 
the letter of intent and the conduct of parties. Relevant paragraph 
of the said judgement is quoted herein for reference:
“22. We would like to state the issue whether a concluded 
contract had been arrived at inter se the parties is in turn 
dependent on the terms and conditions of the NIT, the Lol 
and the conduct of the parties. The judicial views before 
us leave little doubt over the proposition that an Lol merely 
indicates a party’s intention to enter into a contract with 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
109
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
the other party in future. No binding relationship between 
the parties at this stage emerges and the totality of the 
circumstances have to be considered in each case. It 
is no doubt possible to construe a letter of intent as a 
binding contract if such an intention is evident from its 
terms. But then the intention to do so must be clear and 
unambiguous as it takes a deviation from how normally 
a letter of intent has to be understood. This Court did 
consider in Dresser Rand S.A. case that there are cases 
where a detailed contract is drawn up later on account 
of anxiety to start work on an urgent basis. In that case 
it was clearly stated that the contract will come into force 
upon receipt of letter by the supplier, and yet on a holistic 
analysis - it was held that the Lol could not be interpreted 
as a work order.”
33.	 Applying the said principles of law to the facts of this case, we are 
in agreement with the argument of the Appellant that the LOI in the 
facts of the instant case was a promise to make a promise and not a 
promise itself and no agreement had concluded between the parties. 
The word ‘contract’ as defined in Clause 1(c) of the Special Conditions 
contained in the Tender documents is ‘the document forming Notice 
Inviting Tenders, Tender Form, General Conditions of Contract, 
Technical Specifications, priced schedule of items, contract agreement 
and drawings and any other document which may be included at 
the time of signing of contract agreement along with acceptance of 
the contract thereof together’. This definition incorporates the tender 
framework under Clause 23 of the ‘Instructions to Tenderers’ of the 
Tender documents, which posits that an agreement will be entered 
into by the Appellant with the successful bidder. 
34.	 The LOI provided that the work under the contract is entrusted to 
the Respondent subject to terms and conditions and as per clause 
2 of the LOI, the time-limit to complete the entire work was six 
months from the date of handing over of the sites. Pertinently, the 
Appellant never handed over the sites to the Respondent. Clause 3 
provided that security deposit to the tune of 5% of order value, being 
₹88,81,000 must be deposited by means of demand draft or F.D.R. 
or B.G. of any nationalized bank within 10 days from the date of 
receipt of LOI. Alternatively, 50% of the security deposit, amounting 
to ₹44,40,500 shall be deposited in the said form and the balance 

110
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
amount of ₹44,40,500 may be deducted from the R.A. bill. Clause 7 
of the LOI provides for the requirement to obtain insurance in specific 
form as mentioned therein. At the end of the LOI, it is mentioned 
that the LOI has been issued to enable the Respondent to start 
with the preliminaries so that work may be initiated as soon as the 
work order is issued. It contemplates a work order to be issued at 
a subsequent stage.
35.	 Neither the specifications of the Tender documents, nor the LOI 
provides that the LOI itself would result in a concluded contract. 
Rather, the Tender documents in Clause 23 of the ‘Instructions to 
Tenderers’ specifically provides for an agreement to be entered into 
between the Appellant and the successful tenderer and same is the 
import of Clause 1(c) defining the word ‘contract’. The intent behind 
the LOI is explicitly clarified as merely to ensure that preliminaries 
are complied with so that the work may begin upon issuance of a 
work order. No such work order was issued pursuant to the LOI. On 
this count, it is stressed by the Respondent that it had submitted 
the requisite security deposit by means of bank guarantees and 
they were renewed from time to time. However, neither the LOI nor 
the Tender documents contemplate that upon submission of bank 
guarantees, the contract would be said to be concluded, creating 
a binding legal relationship. Rather, they both contemplate the 
issuance of a work order and the signing of an agreement; mere 
completion of preliminaries cannot be said to be sufficient to form a 
binding legal relationship unless specified in the terms of the tender 
specifications. From a reading of the LOI, the clauses relating to 
submission of security deposit and insurance clearly show the tender 
framework, where after acceptance of the bid, work was entrusted 
to the Respondent subject to terms and conditions which were 
procedural in nature, contemplating that at a later stage, a final work 
order was to be issued and an agreement was to be entered into 
between the parties.
36.	 In the above conspectus of facts, from a holistic reading of the Tender 
documents, the LOI and other subsequent communication between 
the parties, the LOI does not evince the commercial intention of 
the Appellant to create a binding legal relationship, it informs the 
Respondent that the work was entrusted to them upon opening of bids 
and lays down preliminary conditions to be fulfilled in contemplation 
of a future work order and agreement in order to ensure that prior to 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
111
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
the work order being issued, everything is set in place and the work 
may begin at once upon such issuance. As such, it cannot be said 
that the LOI had the effect of creating a binding legal relationship 
between the parties.
37.	 In the instant case, the Appellant argues further that even assuming 
arguendo that the LOI itself can be considered a source of binding 
legal relationship between the parties, the LOI has made a general 
reference to the Tender documents and such a general reference 
cannot have the effect of ‘incorporation’ of the arbitration clause 
contained therein, in light of Section 7(5) of the 1996 Act. Section 7(5) 
provides that ‘The reference in a contract to a document containing an 
arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration agreement if the contract 
is in writing and the reference is such as to make that arbitration 
clause part of the contract.’. 
38.	 Reference in this respect has also been made to the judgement of this 
Court in NBCC (India) Ltd. (Supra). In the said judgement, this Court 
dealt with facts which are somewhat similar to the instant appeal; the 
arbitration clause was contained in the ‘Request for Proposal’ in the 
tender documents and the contract was awarded to the Respondent 
therein by means of issuance of a letter of intent which made the 
terms and conditions of the said tender documents applicable to 
the letter of intent as well. This Court drew a distinction between 
‘reference’ and ‘incorporation’ of an arbitration clause, and after 
discussing the decisions in M.R. Engineers & Contractors (P) Ltd. 
v. Som Datt Builders Ltd.,12 and Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables 
Ltd.,13 found that the arbitration clause contained in some document 
may be incorporated in the contract between the parties only by a 
specific reference to the arbitration clause. The intent of the parties 
to incorporate the arbitration clause has to be explicitly clear and a 
mere general ‘reference’ to the tender conditions would not suffice. 
Relevant paragraphs of the said judgement are quoted herein for 
reference:
“16. The issue is no more res integra. The provisions of 
sub-section (5) of Section 7 of the Arbitration Act have 
been considered by this Court in M.R. Engineers  & 
12	
(2009) 7 SCC 696.
13	
(2018) 2 SCC 519.

112
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Contractors [M.R. Engineers & Contractors (P) Ltd. v. 
Som Datt Builders Ltd., (2009) 7 SCC 696 : (2009) 3 SCC 
(Civ) 271] . After considering the relevant passages from 
Russell on Arbitration and various English judgments, this 
Court held thus : (SCC p. 707, para 24)
“24. The scope and intent of Section 7(5) of the Act 
may therefore be summarised thus—
(i) An arbitration clause in another document, would 
get incorporated into a contract by reference, if the 
following conditions are fulfilled;
(1) the contract should contain a clear reference 
to the documents containing arbitration clause,
(2) the reference to the other document should 
clearly indicate an intention to incorporate the 
arbitration clause into the contract,
(3) the arbitration clause should be appropriate, 
that is capable of application in respect of 
disputes under the contract and should not be 
repugnant to any term of the contract.
(ii) When the parties enter into a contract, making a 
general reference to another contract, such general 
reference would not have the effect of incorporating 
the arbitration clause from the referred document 
into the contract between the parties. The arbitration 
clause from another contract can be incorporated into 
the contract (where such reference is made), only by 
a specific reference to arbitration clause.
(iii) Where a contract between the parties provides 
that the execution or performance of that contract 
shall be in terms of another contract (which contains 
the terms and conditions relating to performance and 
a provision for settlement of disputes by arbitration), 
then, the terms of the referred contract in regard to 
execution/performance alone will apply, and not the 
arbitration agreement in the referred contract, unless 
there is special reference to the arbitration clause also.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
113
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
(iv) Where the contract provides that the standard 
form of terms and conditions of an independent 
trade or professional institution (as for example the 
standard terms and conditions of a trade association 
or architects association) will bind them or apply 
to the contract, such standard form of terms and 
conditions including any provision for arbitration in 
such standard terms and conditions, shall be deemed 
to be incorporated by reference. Sometimes the 
contract may also say that the parties are familiar with 
those terms and conditions or that the parties have 
read and understood the said terms and conditions.
(v) Where the contract between the parties stipulates 
that the conditions of contract of one of the parties 
to the contract shall form a part of their contract (as 
for example the general conditions of contract of 
the Government where the Government is a party), 
the arbitration clause forming part of such general 
conditions of contract will apply to the contract 
between the parties.”
17. It could thus be seen that this Court has held that when 
the parties enter into a contract, making a general reference 
to another contract, such general reference would not have 
the effect of incorporating the arbitration clause from the 
referred document into the contract between the parties. 
It has been held that the arbitration clause from another 
contract can be incorporated into the contract (where 
such reference is made), only by a specific reference to 
arbitration clause. It has further been held that where a 
contract between the parties provides that the execution or 
performance of that contract shall be in terms of another 
contract (which contains the terms and conditions relating 
to performance and a provision for settlement of disputes 
by arbitration), then, the terms of the referred contract in 
regard to execution/performance alone will apply, and not 
the arbitration agreement in the referred contract, unless 
there is special reference to the arbitration clause also.
18. This Court further held that where the contract provides 
that the standard form of terms and conditions of an 

114
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
independent trade or professional institution will bind them 
or apply to the contract, such standard form of terms and 
conditions including any provision for arbitration in such 
standard terms and conditions, shall be deemed to be 
incorporated by reference. It has been held that sometimes 
the contract may also say that the parties are familiar with 
those terms and conditions or that the parties have read and 
understood the said terms and conditions. It has also been 
held that where the contract between the parties stipulates 
that the conditions of contract of one of the parties to the 
contract shall form a part of their contract, the arbitration 
clause forming part of such general conditions of contract 
will apply to the contract between the parties.
19. A perusal of sub-section (5) of Section 7 of the 
Arbitration Act itself would reveal that it provides for a 
conscious acceptance of the arbitration clause from another 
document, by the parties, as a part of their contract, before 
such arbitration clause could be read as a part of the 
contract between the parties.
20. It is thus clear that a reference to the document in 
the contract should be such that shows the intention 
to incorporate the arbitration clause contained in the 
document into the contract.
21. The law laid down in M.R. Engineers & Contractors 
[M.R. Engineers & Contractors (P) Ltd. v. Som Datt Builders 
Ltd., (2009) 7 SCC 696 : (2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 271] has 
been followed by this Court in Duro Felguera, S.A. v. 
Gangavaram Port Ltd. [Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram 
Port Ltd., (2017) 9 SCC 729 : (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764] 
and Elite Engg. & Construction (Hyd.) (P) Ltd. v. Techtrans 
Construction India (P) Ltd. [Elite Engg. & Construction 
(Hyd.) (P) Ltd. v. Techtrans Construction India (P) Ltd., 
(2018) 4 SCC 281 : (2018) 3 SCC (Civ) 60]
22. No doubt that this Court in Inox Wind Ltd. v. 
Thermocables Ltd. [Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables 
Ltd., (2018) 2 SCC 519 : (2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 195] has 
distinguished the law laid down in M.R. Engineers & 
Contractors [M.R. Engineers & Contractors (P) Ltd. v. Som 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
115
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
Datt Builders Ltd., (2009) 7 SCC 696 : (2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 
271]. In the said case (i.e. Inox Wind [Inox Wind Ltd. v. 
Thermocables Ltd., (2018) 2 SCC 519 : (2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 
195] ), this Court has held that though general reference to 
an earlier contract is not sufficient for incorporation of an 
arbitration clause in the later contract, a general reference 
to a standard form would be enough for incorporation of 
the arbitration clause. Though this Court in Inox Wind 
[Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables Ltd., (2018) 2 SCC 519 : 
(2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 195] agrees with the judgment in M.R. 
Engineers & Contractors [M.R. Engineers & Contractors 
(P) Ltd. v. Som Datt Builders Ltd., (2009) 7 SCC 696 : 
(2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 271] , it holds that general reference to 
a standard form of contract of one party along with those of 
trade associations and professional bodies will be sufficient 
to incorporate the arbitration clause. In the said case (i.e. 
Inox Wind [Inox Wind Ltd. v. Thermocables Ltd., (2018) 2 
SCC 519 : (2018) 2 SCC (Civ) 195] ), this Court found that 
the purchase order was issued by the appellant therein 
in which it was categorically mentioned that the supply 
would be as per the terms mentioned therein and in the 
attached standard terms and conditions. The respondent 
therein by his letter had confirmed its acceptance. This 
Court found that the case before it was a case of a single 
contract and not two-contract case and, therefore, held 
that the arbitration clause as mentioned in the terms and 
conditions would be applicable.
23. The present case is a “two-contract” case and not a 
“single-contract” case.
…
29. As already discussed hereinabove, when there is a 
reference in the second contract to the terms and conditions 
of the first contract, the arbitration clause would not ipso 
facto be applicable to the second contract unless there is 
a specific mention/reference thereto.
30. We are of the considered view that the present case 
is not a case of “incorporation” but a case of “reference”. 
As such, a general reference would not have the effect of 

116
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
incorporating the arbitration clause. In any case, Clause 7.0 
of the LoI, which is also a part of the agreement, makes 
it amply clear that the redressal of the dispute between 
NBCC and the respondent has to be only through civil 
courts having jurisdiction of Delhi alone.”
39.	 Although this Court in NBCC (India) Ltd. (Supra) was dealing 
with a factual situation which was quite similar to the instant case, 
the reasons why the Court interfered with the appointment of an 
arbitrator in the said case were twofold. Apart from the fact that 
a general reference in the letter of intent to an arbitration clause 
contained in the tender documents was found to not be sufficient 
for its incorporation, the second reason was that the letter of intent 
in that case had a separate dispute resolution clause which limited 
redressal of disputes to civil courts having jurisdiction of Delhi alone. 
Even then, the law laid down in respect of incorporation of arbitration 
clauses contained in tender documents by means of reference in 
the letter of intent is squarely applicable to the facts of the instant 
case. The LOI in the instant case makes a reference to the Tender 
documents contained in the following terms:
“Notwithstanding that reference are given above, the terms 
and conditions and specifications of contract shall be 
interpreted by reading together the terms and conditions, 
specifications and contents of this Letter of intent as 
below. In case of any deviations with the contents of this 
Letter of intent from corresponding conditions in the above 
said tender specifications or contents of the letter under 
reference as read and interpreted up to date, the contents 
of this Letter of intent shall prevail.” 
In our view, this is a case of ‘reference’ and not ‘incorporation’. There 
is no mention of any arbitration or dispute resolution clause in the 
LOI itself, neither does it purport specific incorporation thereof from 
the tender documents. As such, the arbitration clause contained in 
the Tender documents could not be said to have been incorporated in 
the LOI to evince the existence of an arbitration agreement between 
the parties on its conjoint reading with the Tender documents.
40.	 The judgements of this Court in NBCC (India) Ltd. (Supra) as well 
as M.R. Engineers & Contractors (P) Ltd. (Supra) were recently 
discussed and distinguished on facts by a co-ordinate bench of this 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
117
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution  
Company Limited (Msedcl) & Ors. v. R Z Malpani
Court in Glencore International AG v. Shree Ganesh Metals14. In 
the facts of that case, there was no incorporation of the arbitration 
agreement, but rather the contract containing the arbitration 
agreement was never signed by the parties, but it was acted upon 
and the communication between the parties evinced the creation 
of a binding legal relationship between them. In such context, the 
Court placed reliance on the judgement in Govind Rubber Ltd. 
(Supra) and held that non-signing of the contract containing the 
arbitration agreement cannot invalidate the arbitration agreement 
which is in writing and the parties seem to be ad idem in respect of 
the agreement by communication about the contract. The judgement 
in Glencore International AG (Supra) is not applicable to the facts 
of this case since it distinguishes the judgement in NBCC (India) 
Ltd. (Supra) where the factual scenario was quite similar to the facts 
of the instant appeal.
41.	 Similar is the case of the judgement in UNISSI (India) (P) Ltd. (Supra) 
relied upon by the Appellant where the tender documents contained 
an arbitration clause and the tender offer of the Appellant therein was 
accepted and the Appellant therein acted upon the said acceptance 
and made supply of oxymeters required under the tender even though 
no formal contract was signed between the parties. In such context, 
the Court held that the arbitration agreement contained in the tender 
was applicable and dispute between the parties ought to be referred 
to an arbitrator. In the facts of the present case, the terms of the 
tender itself have never been worked upon by the Respondent. The 
Work Order was never issued by the Appellant and the sites were 
never handed over by the Appellant. The Respondent has submitted 
bank guarantees pursuant to the LOI, which at best is a preliminary 
requirement as a precursor to the Work Order being issued. As 
discussed above, the LOI in the instant case was indicative of a 
preliminary document in course of the contract and was not intended 
to be an end-all-be-all contract between the parties, it did not create 
contractual obligations or legal relationship between them.
42.	 It goes without saying that the scope of inquiry at the stage of 
Section 11 is extremely limited and only pertains to an examination 
about prima facie existence of an arbitration agreement. Judicial 
14	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1815.

118
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
non-interference in the arbitration process is the sacrosanct principle 
which guides alternative dispute resolution and Courts must be 
highly circumspect in interfering at the referral stage, especially 
since there is no appeal available in the 1996 Act against an order 
under Section 11. The Arbitral Tribunal, in exercise of its jurisdiction 
under Section 16 must be left to decide on its jurisdiction. The 
Courts should follow the principle of ‘When in doubt, do refer’ and 
lean towards referring matters to arbitration when the arbitration 
agreement is prima facie existent. However, it is only in the rarest 
of rare cases where even on a prima facie view, without going into 
disputed facts between the parties, there appears to be no existence 
of arbitration agreement between the parties, the Court can reject 
the application for appointment of an arbitrator and reference of 
the parties to arbitration. The instant case appears to be a fit case 
where, as discussed, even without going into the disputed facts and 
merely on a prima facie view of the matter, there is no existence of 
arbitration agreement and therefore, the decision of the High Court 
to appoint an arbitrator requires interference. 
43.	 As an upshot of the above discussion, the instant appeal deserves 
to be allowed and the order impugned passed by the High Court 
stands set aside. The Respondent is given the liberty to pursue other 
alternative remedies in accordance with law, if any, available to it. 
All interim application(s) shall be treated to be disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
