[2026] 5 S.C.R. 37 : 2026 INSC 328
UCO Bank & Ors. 
v. 
SK Shrivastava
(Civil Appeal No. 375 of 2020)
07 April 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari* and Vijay Bishnoi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Under Regulation 29 of UCO Bank (Employees’) Pension 
Regulations, 1995 (Pension Regulation), a notice of voluntary 
retirement if not refused within the prescribed period of three 
months or before the date as specified in the notice, whether such 
notice would be deemed to be accepted on expiry of such period; 
whether issuance of show cause notice dated 11.11.2010 by the 
Appellant may fall within the purview of institution of the disciplinary 
proceedings and such proceedings be treated as pending in terms 
of Regulation 20(3)(i) & (ii) of the Service Regulation; whether 
further action taken by the Appellant in issuing chargesheet to 
conduct an inquiry and pass consequential order of dismissal 
from service would withstand the scrutiny of law; in the facts and 
looking to the legal position, whether the judgments of the High 
Court warrant interference.
Headnotes†
UCO Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 1995 – 
Regulation 29 – UCO Bank (Officers’) Service Regulations, 
1979 – Regulation 20(3)(ii) – Respondent-Branch Manager sent 
a notice of voluntary retirement on 04.10.2010 giving three 
months’ notice as required, effective till 04.01.2011 – In the 
meantime, a show-cause notice dtd.11.11.2010 was issued to the 
Respondent seeking explanation regarding some suspicious 
transactions however, initiation of disciplinary proceedings 
was not indicated therein – Vide letter dtd.14.05.2011, 
Respondent stopped working with the bank w.e.f. 16.05.2011 – 
On 29.06.2011, Respondent was informed that his request for 
voluntary retirement was not accepted – Respondent was 
subsequent charge-sheeted – Non-acceptance of voluntary 
* Author

38
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
retirement and consequent initiation of inquiry and dismissal, 
challenged by the Respondent – Writ petitions allowed by 
Single Judge directing grant of terminal benefits to the 
Respondent, order confirmed in writ appeal by the High Court:
Held: Impugned order upheld – Regulation 29 of Pension Regulation 
governs the voluntary retirement and its acceptance until refused 
by the appointing authority within notice period, otherwise it 
would become effective on lapse of the time specified in the 
notice – A positive act of passing an order of refusal is required 
to be undertaken by the appointing authority – Thus, the request 
of voluntary retirement if not refused within the period specified 
in the notice or withheld, the deemed approval of voluntary 
retirement would be effective on expiry of notice period – Officer 
submitted his notice of voluntary retirement on 04.10.2010, giving 
three months’ notice as required, which would be effective till 
04.01.2011 – Show cause notice issued in the meantime by the 
Appellant on 11.11.2010 did not indicate the intention to institute 
disciplinary proceedings in terms of Regulation 20(3)(ii) of the 
Service Regulation – Nonetheless, the existence of such a show 
cause notice itself is not sufficient without refusal by competent 
authority to stop the automatic operation of the notice of voluntary 
retirement – In absence, the notice of voluntary retirement would 
take its course – In the present case, no such order of refusal 
or order of withholding was passed by the competent authority 
within the stipulated period – The notice of voluntary retirement, 
therefore, became effective automatically by efflux of time upon 
the expiry of the three-month period on 04.01.2011 – The non-
approval communicated on 29.06.2011, after expiry of the notice 
period and cessation of work vide notice dtd.14.05.2011 with effect 
from 16.05.2011, is of no avail to the bank – When an employee 
decides to severe master servant relationship and serves a notice 
indicating such intention specifying the period, by operation of law 
it will become effective in absence of any order of refusal – The 
subsequent act of issuing chargesheet and consequential order 
of dismissal is also not justified in law – No infirmity in the view 
taken by the High Court. [Paras 26, 28, 30, 33, 43, 45]
Interpretation of Statutes – Harmonious construction – UCO 
Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 1995 – Regulation 
29(1) and (2) – UCO Bank (Officers’) Service Regulations, 
1979 – Regulation 20(3)(i)-(iii):

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
39
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
Held: Provision of Regulation 20(3)(i), (ii), (iii) of Service Regulations 
and Regulation 29(1) and (2) of the Pension Regulation, ought 
to be read in tandem harmoniously – Regulation 20(3)(i) & (ii) of 
the Service Regulation deals with cessation of service and when 
it would not affect the pendency of disciplinary proceedings  – 
It puts an embargo only in two specific contingencies, first, 
where the officer is placed under suspension, second, where a 
show-cause notice has been issued for institution of disciplinary 
proceedings – In either of the situation, an officer would require 
prior approval of the competent authority – Indeed it is true that 
voluntary retirement is also a mode to ‘leave or discontinue’ 
service, therefore to such extent, Regulation 20(3)(i) & (ii) may 
have relevance – Nonetheless, voluntary retirement is not a 
mere act of leaving or discontinuing, rather, a distinct right of an 
employee that is available on completion of the requisite number 
of years of service, etc. – As per intent of Regulation 20(3)(i) & 
(ii), the employee cannot leave without approval of the competent 
authority pending the disciplinary proceedings irrespective of the 
fact that he has tendered notice to that effect – However, on literal 
reading of proviso to Regulation 29(2) of Pension Regulation, the 
intent thereof seems to be otherwise i.e., unless refused by the 
competent authority within the period prescribed in the notice, the 
voluntary retirement shall become automatically effective – It is in 
this context provisions of both regulations ought to be harmoniously 
constructed – While Regulation 20(3) (i) & (ii) of Service Regulation 
permits the authority to not grant ‘approval’ where disciplinary 
proceedings are pending; Regulation 29 of Pension Regulation also 
achieves the same effectively, through its proviso, by permitting 
the authority to ‘refuse’ voluntary retirement, but within the notice 
period – Therefore, essence and intent are the same subject to 
some restrictions. [Para 34]
UCO Bank (Officers’) Service Regulations, 1979 – Regulation 
20(3)(iii) – When not applicable:
Held: If disciplinary proceedings against an officer are pending and 
he wishes to leave/discontinue or resign, he may be permitted to 
do so by prior approval of the competent authority in writing – Such 
notice, if any, given by the officer before or during the disciplinary 
proceedings, shall not be given effect unless accepted by the 
competent authority – The pendency of the disciplinary proceedings 

40
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
would include suspension or issuance of a show-cause notice for 
institution of the disciplinary proceedings – Regulation 20(3)(iii) of 
the Service Regulation applies where the disciplinary proceedings 
were initiated prior to attaining the age of superannuation, and 
prescribes the recourse to the bank after attaining the age of 
superannuation, which is not of much relevance in the facts of 
this case. [Para 32]
Case Law Cited
UCO Bank v. Rajinder Lal Capoor [2007] 7 SCR 543 : (2007) 6 
SCC 694; UCO Bank v. Rajinder Lal Capoor [2008] 5 SCR 775 : 
(2008) 5 SCC 257; State Bank of India & Ors. v. Navin Kumar 
Sinha [2024] 11 SCR 799 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3369; UCO 
Bank & Ors. v. M.B. Motwani (Dead) thr. L.Rs and Ors. [2023] 16 
SCR 525 : (2024) 13 SCC 109; Canara Bank v. D.R.P. Sundharam 
(2016) 12 SCC 724 – held not applicable.
State of Haryana & Ors. v. S.K. Singhal [1999] 2 SCR 714 : (1999) 
4 SCC 293; Tek Chand v. Dile Ram [2001] 1 SCR 527 : (2001) 
3 SCC 290; Dinesh Chandra Sangma v. State of Assam & Ors. 
[1978] 1 SCR 607 : (1977) 4 SCC 441; B.J. Shelat v. State of 
Gujarat and Ors. [1978] 3 SCR 553 : (1978) 2 SCC 202; Union of 
India and Ors. v. Sayed Muzaffar Mir [1994] Supp. 3 SCR 729 : 
(1995) Supp. 1 SCC 76 – referred to.
List of Acts
UCO Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 1995; UCO Bank 
(Officers’) Service Regulations, 1979.
List of Keywords
Regulation 29 of UCO Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 
1995; Regulation 20(3) of UCO Bank (Officers’) Service 
Regulations, 1979; Notice of voluntary retirement; Notice of 
voluntary retirement not refused within prescribed period would 
be deemed to be accepted; Deemed approval of voluntary 
retirement effective on expiry of notice period; Notice of voluntary 
retirement effective automatically by efflux of time; Retired prior 
to institution of the disciplinary proceedings; No intention to 
institute disciplinary proceedings; Absence of order of refusal 
of voluntary retirement.

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
41
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 375 of 2020
From the Judgment and Order dated 7.01.2019 of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in WA No. 824 of 2018
With
Civil Appeal No. 376 of 2020
Appearances for Parties
Gaurav Agarwal, Sr. Adv./Amicus Curiae
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Brijesh Kumar Tamber, Vinay Singh Bisht, Prateek Kushwaha,  
Ms. Arani Mukherjee, Yashu Rustagi, Sahas Bhasin, Vaibhav 
Dayma.
Respondent-in-person
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1.	
The Civil Appeal No. 375 of 2020 is arising out of the judgment dated 
07.01.2019 in Writ Appeal No. 824 of 2018 by the High Court of 
Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur (hereinafter ‘High Court’) preferred against 
the judgment dated 28.09.2018 in WP (S) No. 1620 of 2012, wherein 
the direction for grant of terminal benefits to Respondent No. 1 was 
issued. Learned Single Judge was of the view that after completion 
of the notice period of three months as specified in the notice for 
voluntary retirement or from the date of stopping to attend the 
service, the Respondent be treated retired voluntarily. Since he stood 
retired prior to institution of the disciplinary proceedings, therefore, 
he is entitled to all consequential benefits as per Rules governing 
the field. The Division Bench reaffirmed the finding of the learned 
Single Judge inter alia observing that since option of refusal of notice 
for voluntary retirement was not exercised by the Appellant-Bank 
before the expiry of notice period i.e. 04.01.2011 or even prior to 
16.05.2011 i.e. the date since when the employee decided to severe 
the master servant relationship, therefore, communication made 

42
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
subsequently to refuse the request of voluntary retirement cannot 
be given retrospective effect to undo an act which was deemed to 
have been done. 
2.	
In Civil Appeal No. 376 of 2020, the judgment dated 12.07.2019 
in Writ Appeal No. 321 of 2019 is under challenge, whereby, the 
judgment dated 24.04.2019 passed in WP (S) No. 5109 of 2012 
was assailed. Learned Single Judge while allowing the writ petition 
opined that the employee stood retired with effect from the date of 
severance of master servant relationship i.e. 16.05.2011, therefore, 
the chargesheet issued on 05.03.2012 after retirement is liable to 
be quashed. In view of the judgment dated 28.09.2018 delivered 
in WP (S) No. 1620 of 2012 which was affirmed by the Division 
Bench, the learned Single Judge quashed the chargesheet and the 
consequential order of dismissal along with costs of Rs. 25,000/-. 
3.	
In the present two appeals filed by the Appellant-bank, the Respondent 
herein was the petitioner before High Court. The former writ petition 
relates to grant of terminal benefits to him and the latter relates to 
challenge to chargesheet and his dismissal from service. Consequent 
upon the decision in the previous writ petition, the latter writ petition 
was allowed. Since both the appeals have been filed in relation to 
the same employee, therefore, both the Civil Appeals are heard 
analogously and being decided by this common judgment. 
4.	
The issue pertaining to the voluntary retirement is governed by the 
UCO Bank (Employees’) Pension Regulations, 1995 (hereinafter 
referred to as ‘Pension Regulation’) as stood on the date on which 
notice for voluntary retirement was submitted by the Respondent. 
The service conditions of the employee are governed by the UCO 
Bank (Officers’) Service Regulations, 1979 (hereinafter referred to as 
‘Service Regulation’) applicable for termination or discontinuation 
from employment of the Bank. The said Regulation was later amended 
on 30.04.2011. 
FACTUAL MATRIX
5.	
The facts unveiling the controversy are that the Respondent was 
appointed as Clerk-cum-Godown Keeper in UCO Bank on 10.09.1983 
and promoted as an Assistant Manager with effect from 01.01.2000. 
He was further promoted as Manager w.e.f. 26.04.2007. In July 2010, 
while working as Branch Manager at Raipur Branch, some suspicious 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
43
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
transactions in the account of M/s. Bhanu Road Carriers and M/s. 
Progressive Exim Ltd. came to the knowledge of the Appellant. 
Internal correspondence was made from Head Office to Zonal Office 
regarding the same. In the meantime, Respondent sent a notice 
of voluntary retirement on 04.10.2010 to the General Manager, 
Kolkata. In response, Zonal Office asked for fresh application under 
the Pension Regulation. The Head Office also sought information 
regarding vigilance, non-vigilance or court case and an undertaking 
to the effect that he would not accept any commercial employment 
for two years from the date of acceptance of his voluntary retirement.
6.	
In the interregnum, the Zonal Office issued a show-cause notice dated 
11.11.2010 and asked explanation regarding alleged transactions 
and suspicious entries in the accounts as referred above. An internal 
communication between the Head Office and the Zonal Office dated 
11.12.2010 indicates that voluntary retirement of Respondent was 
not considered because of proposed changes in Pension Regulation, 
therefore, the Respondent was advised to continue in service, and a 
communication from Zonal Office to the Chief Manager, UCO Bank, 
Bilaspur was made on 20.12.2010 to that effect. The Head Office 
wrote another letter to Zonal Office on 06.04.2011 stating that since 
show cause notice has been issued on 11.11.2010 to the Respondent, 
therefore his request for voluntary retirement cannot be considered, 
and the same was communicated to the branch office. 
7.	
On 09.05.2011, reply to the show cause notice was submitted, and in 
the meantime, an undertaking was furnished by the Respondent on 
11.04.2011 that he shall not take any commercial employment. Since 
the period specified in the notice for voluntary retirement had elapsed, 
hence, after writing a letter dated 14.05.2011, Respondent stopped 
working with the bank w.e.f. 16.05.2011. Later, vide communication 
dated 29.06.2011 it was informed to the Respondent by post sent 
from Bilaspur Branch that his request for voluntary retirement is not 
being accepted. As per information supplied by the Postal Department, 
the said letter was never delivered to the Respondent and the High 
Court has also taken note of the said fact. 
8.	
After about eight months from the date when he severed his 
employment with the Appellant, the Respondent was charge-sheeted 
on 05.03.2012 alleging the suspicious transactions as mentioned 
hereinabove. Challenging the non-acceptance of voluntary retirement 

44
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and consequent initiation of inquiry and dismissal, the Respondent 
filed the respective writ petitions, which were allowed by the learned 
Single Judge and confirmed in writ appeal by the High Court vide 
impugned order. Hence, the present two appeals.
9.	
In the course of hearing, both the parties have placed reliance on 
the judgments of this Court in UCO Bank v. Rajinder Lal Capoor1 
(hereinafter ‘R.L. Capoor - I’), UCO Bank v. Rajinder Lal Capoor2 
(hereinafter ‘R.L. Capoor - II’) and the judgment of Three-Judge 
Bench in Canara Bank v. D.R.P. Sundharam3. All the said judgments 
deal with Regulation 20(3)(iii) of the Service Regulation, consequential 
effect of show cause notice and meaning of deemed pendency. 
Considering the peculiar facts of the case and that the Respondent 
himself was appearing in person as well as looking to the questions 
of law as involved, Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, learned senior counsel, was 
appointed as amicus curiae to assist the Court, who agreed to assist 
us in examining the legal issues involved in these two appeals. 
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY THE PARTIES
10.	 Learned counsel for the Appellant, the Respondent-in-person and 
learned amicus curiae have advanced their arguments and were 
heard at length. Learned counsel for the Appellant assailed the 
judgment of the High Court placing reliance on Regulation 20(3)(ii) of 
the Service Regulation and contended that in case a notice to show 
cause for institution of disciplinary action has been issued, it would 
amount to pendency of the disciplinary proceedings, and during such 
pendency, the request for voluntary retirement cannot be accepted. It 
is further argued that the deeming fiction as contained in Regulation 
29(1) and (2) of the Pension Regulation may not be applicable on 
elapse of three months’ notice period as specified therein, in case 
the disciplinary proceeding is pending as per Regulation 20(3)(ii) of 
the Service Regulation. In support of his contentions, reliance has 
been placed upon the aforementioned judgments.
11.	 Per contra, the Respondent-in-person, submitted that while allowing 
the writ petition, the High Court recorded the reasons in detail 
1	
(2007) 6 SCC 694
2	
(2008) 5 SCC 257
3	
(2016) 12 SCC 724

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
45
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
indicating that the voluntary retirement was deemed to have been 
accepted w.e.f. the date of expiry of three months’ notice period or 
from the date of cessation of employment i.e., 16.05.2011. It was 
contended that the show cause notice dated 11.11.2010 does not 
indicate about initiation of disciplinary proceedings, as required under 
Regulation 20(3)(ii) of the Service Regulation. It is also contended, in 
case the disciplinary proceedings is not initiated prior to retirement, 
dismissal from service consequent to such proceedings is arbitrary 
and without any sanction under the law, and as such, the findings 
of the High Court do not warrant interference. In view of the above 
submissions, it was prayed that the Appeals preferred by the Bank 
may be dismissed with direction to pay the post retiral and pensionary 
benefits within time frame along with interest. 
12.	 Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, learned senior counsel and amicus, has placed 
all the facts in detail in his brief note of submissions and argued that 
Regulation 29 of the Pension Regulation would apply for voluntary 
retirement on completion of 20 years of service in case the notice 
to that effect proposing a date of not less than three months has 
been given in writing to the appointing authority. As per the proviso 
to Regulation 29(2), such notice shall become effective if not refused 
during the notice period. He submits that Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) 
of Regulation 20(3) of the Service Regulation operate in different 
spheres and the judgments referred hereinabove only deal with the 
contingency of Regulation 20(3)(iii), therefore, Regulation 20(3)(ii) 
of the Service Regulation, particularly in facts of the present case, 
requires independent consideration. As per his contention, show 
cause notice dated 11.11.2010 does not indicate the institution of 
disciplinary proceedings and satisfy the requirement contemplated in 
Regulation 20(3)(ii) of the Service Regulation. It was also stated that 
nothing has been placed on record to indicate that the competent 
authority fulfilling the requirement of clause 20(3)(ii) of Service 
Regulation and Clause 29(2) of Pension Regulation has passed any 
order refusing voluntary retirement within the notice period. Lastly, it 
was submitted that the judgment of the High Court is just, equitable 
and in accordance with law, therefore, warrants no interference.
13.	 It is pointed out, the documents dated 28.07.2010 (communication of 
Vigilance Department advising to lodge FIR) and 12.08.2010 (a draft 
show cause notice) placed before this Court along with additional 
affidavit were not filed with counter affidavit before the High Court. The 

46
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
communication of these two documents and internal correspondences 
of the Head Office to the Zonal Office dated 11.12.2010, 20.12.2010 
and 06.04.2011 to the Respondent was also not averred in counter 
affidavit.
14.	 Learned amicus has drawn a distinction between “notice to retire” and 
“request seeking permission to retire” placing reliance on the judgment 
of this Court in State of Haryana & Ors. v. S.K. Singhal4. It is his 
contention that any refusal to accept notice within the period specified 
in the notice has not been placed before the Court. Therefore, in 
terms of proviso of Regulation 29(2) of the Pension Regulations, the 
voluntary retirement is deemed to come into force immediately after 
expiry of the date as specified in the notice. In support, reliance was 
also placed on Tek Chand v. Dile Ram5. 
15.	 In the facts of both these Appeals, the following four questions 
falls for our consideration - (a) Under Regulation 29 of Pension 
Regulation, a notice of voluntary retirement if not refused within the 
prescribed period of three months or before the date as specified in 
the notice, whether such notice would be deemed to be accepted on 
expiry of such period? (b) Whether issuance of show cause notice 
dated 11.11.2010 by the Appellant may fall within the purview of 
institution of the disciplinary proceedings and such proceedings be 
treated as pending in terms of Regulation 20(3)(i) & (ii) of the Service 
Regulation? (c) Whether further action taken by the Appellant in 
issuing chargesheet to conduct an inquiry and pass consequential 
order of dismissal from service would withstand the scrutiny of law? 
(d) In the facts and looking to the legal position discussed, whether 
the judgments of the High Court warrant interference?
ANAYSIS
16.	 On appraisal of the rival contentions and to deal with the questions 
posed above, for ready reference, it is necessary to first refer the 
relevant provisions of the Pension Regulation applicable as on the 
date, governing the issue of voluntary retirement. Regulation 29 of 
Chapter V of the Pension Regulation is relevant therefore reproduced 
as under: 
4	
(1999) 4 SCC 293
5	
(2001) 3 SCC 290

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
47
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
“29. Pension on Voluntary Retirement. – (1) On or 
after the 1st day of November, 1993 at any time after an 
employee has completed twenty years of qualifying service 
he may, by giving notice of not less than three months 
in writing to the appointing authority retire from service;
Provided that this sub-regulation shall not apply to an 
employee who is on deputation or on study leave abroad 
unless after having been transferred or having returned 
to India he has resumed charge of the post in India and 
has served for a period of not less than one year;
Provided further that this sub-regulation shall not apply 
to an employee who seeks retirement from service for 
being absorbed permanently in an autonomous body or a 
public sector undertaking or company or institution or body, 
whether incorporated or not to which he is on deputation 
at the time of seeking voluntary retirement;
Provided that this sub-regulation shall not apply to an 
employee who is deemed to have retired in accordance 
with clause (I) of regulation 2.
(2) The notice of voluntary retirement given under sub-
regulation (1) shall require acceptance by the appointing 
authority;
Provided that where the appointing authority does not 
refuse to grant the permission for retirement before 
the expiry of the period specified in the said notice, the 
retirement shall become effective from the date of expiry 
of the said period.” 
(emphasis supplied)
17.	 Upon reading, it is quite clear, if an employee on or after 1st day of 
November 1993 completes twenty years of qualifying service, and 
furnishes a notice of not less than three months to the appointing 
authority, he may retire voluntarily. Provisos of Regulation 29(1) of 
the Pension Regulation deal with the contingencies which are not 
relevant for the present case. Regulation 29(2) makes it further clear 
that notice for voluntary retirement is required to be given as per 
Regulation 29(1), which is required to be accepted by the appointing 

48
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
authority. Regulation 29(2) of Pension Regulation applies subject to 
proviso to the said sub-regulation, whereby in case the appointing 
authority does not refuses the permission of voluntary retirement 
before the period specified in the notice, the voluntary retirement 
would be effective ipso facto from the date specified in the notice. 
Therefore, in Regulation 29(2), voluntary retirement is qualified by 
an act of the appointing authority to refuse within the notice period. 
Otherwise, the notice of voluntary retirement shall be deemed to be 
accepted from the date or period as indicated in the notice. 
18.	 In view of the discussions made regarding provisions contained 
in Pension Regulation and to understand the import of the said 
provision, we may take guidance from judgments delivered by this 
Court dealing with pari materia provisions and interpretation thereto. 
19.	 In the case of Dinesh Chandra Sangma Vs. State of Assam & 
Ors.6 a Three-Judge bench of this Court was having an occasion 
to deal with a similar issue of voluntary retirement in the context of 
Fundamental Rule 56 (c), wherein this Court observed as follows -
7. Before we proceed further we may read F. Rule 56 as 
amended:
“F. Rule 56. (a) The date of compulsory retirement of 
a Government servant is the date on which he attains 
the age of 55 years. He may be retained in service 
after this age with sanction of the State Government 
on public grounds which must be recorded in writing, 
and proposals for the retention of a Government 
servant in service after this age should not be made 
except in very special circumstances.
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained in these 
rules the appropriate authority may, if he is of the 
opinion that it is in the public interest to do so, retire 
government servant by giving him notice of not less 
than three months in writing or three months’ pay 
and allowances in lieu of such notice, after he has 
attained fifty years of age or has completed 25 years 
of service, whichever is earlier.
6	
	
 (1977) 4 SCC 441

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
49
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
(c) Any government servant may, by giving notice 
of not less than three months in writing to the 
appropriate authority, retire from service after he 
has attained the age of fifty years or has completed 
25 years of service, whichever is earlier.”
***
***
***
8.  ……While the Government reserves its right to 
compulsorily retire a government servant, even against his 
wish, there is a corresponding right of the government 
servant under F. Rule 56(c) to voluntarily retire from 
service by giving the Government three months’ notice 
in writing. There is no question of acceptance of the 
request for voluntary retirement by the Government 
when the government servant exercises his right 
under F. Rule 56 (c). Mr Niren De is therefore right in 
conceding this position.	
***
***
***
17. The High Court committed an error of law holding that 
consent of the Government was necessary to give legal 
effect to the voluntary retirement of the Appellant under 
F. Rule 56(c). Since the conditions of F. Rule 56(c) are 
fulfilled in the instant case, the Appellant must be held to 
have lawfully retired as notified by him with effect from 
August 2, 1976. 
20.	 By the said judgment it was made clear that, as per relevant rules, to 
give effect to the voluntary retirement, the consent of the Government 
was not necessary since the notice given by employee reflects the 
intention to retire voluntarily from the date so specified in the notice. 
Nonetheless, it appears that the said provision did not contain 
any option on the part of the government to refuse the request for 
voluntary retirement. 
21.	 In another judgment of three-Judge Bench in B.J. Shelat Vs. State 
of Gujarat and Ors.7, wherein this Court dealt with the question 
of jurisdiction of the authority to take a disciplinary action and was 
observed as thus: -
7	
(1978) 2 SCC 202

50
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“6. We will proceed to consider the question of the 
jurisdiction of the authority to take disciplinary action against 
the Appellant after his retirement. It may be recalled that 
the Appellant gave a notice intimating his intention to 
retire on July 17, 1973 stating that he intended to retire on 
reaching the age of 55 years on December 3, 1973. He 
attained the age of 55 years on December 3, 1973 and 
it is common ground that the notice of suspension was 
issued by the High Court only on December 11, 1973. But 
before December 3, 1973 it is admitted that a show-cause 
notice was issued on November 23, 1973 by the Chief City 
Magistrate on the directions of the High Court calling upon 
the petitioner to submit his explanation and the Appellant 
submitted his explanation on November 26, 1973.
7. Rule 161 of the Bombay Civil Services Rules provides 
for the retirement of Government servants before attaining 
the age of superannuation. Rule 161(1)(aa) provides—
“Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a):
(1) An appointing authority shall, if he is of the opinion 
that it is in the public interest so to do, have the 
absolute right to retire any Government servant to 
whom clause (a) applies by giving him notice of not 
less than three months in writing or three months’ 
pay and allowances in lieu of such notice:
***
***
***
Sub-rule (2)(ii) is as follows:
“Any Government servant to whom clause (a) applies 
may, by giving notice of not less than three months in 
writing to the Appointing Authority, retire from service... 
and in any other case, after he has attained the age 
of 55 years.”
There is no dispute that the Rule applicable is Rule  
161(2)(ii) and the Appellant is entitled to retire by giving a 
notice of not less than 3 months after he has attained the 
age of 55 years. Under Rule 161(1)(aa)(1) the appointing 
authority has an absolute right to retire any Government 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
51
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
servant to whom clause (a) applies in public interest by 
giving him notice of not less than three months in writing 
or three months’ pay and allowances in lieu of such notice. 
But the Government servant has no such absolute right. A 
right is conferred on the Government servant under Rule 
161(2)(ii) to retire by giving not less than three months’ 
notice on his attaining the prescribed age. Such a right 
is subject to the proviso which is incorporated to the sub-
section which reads as follows:
“Provided that it shall be open to the appointing 
authority to withhold permission to retire to a 
Government servant who is under suspension, 
or against whom departmental proceedings are 
pending or contemplated, and who seeks to retire 
under this sub-clause.”
But for the proviso a Government servant would be at 
liberty to retire by giving not less than three months’ 
notice in writing to the appointing authority on attaining 
the prescribed age.”  
22.	 In the above case, the judgment of Dinesh Chandra Sangma 
(Supra) was relied upon and applying the law as prevalent, the 
Court observed as thus: 
“8. ……. In the case before us it is incumbent on the 
appointing authority to withhold permission to retire on one 
of the conditions mentioned in the proviso. We are of the 
view that the proviso contemplates a positive action by 
the appointing authority. The words “It shall be open to 
the appointing authority to withhold permission” would 
indicate that the appointing authority has got an option 
to withhold permission and that could be exercised by 
communicating its intention to withhold permission 
to the Government servant. The appointing authority 
may have considered the question and might not have 
taken a decision either way or after considering the 
facts of the case might have come to the conclusion 
that it is better to allow the Government servant to 
retire than take any action against him. For the proviso 
to become operative it is necessary that the Government 

52
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
should not only take a decision but communicate it to the 
Government servant.”  
23.	 The Court also interpreted the meaning of the word ‘withhold’ in case 
the disciplinary proceedings are pending and a person applied for 
voluntary retirement, wherein following was observed :- 
“9. Mr Patel next referred us to the meaning of the 
word “withhold” in  Webster’s Third New International 
Dictionary which is given as “hold back” and submitted that 
the permission should be deemed to have been withheld 
if it is not communicated. We are not able to read the 
meaning of the word “withhold” as indicating that in the 
absence of a communication it must be understood as the 
permission having been withheld.
10. It will be useful to refer to the analogous provision 
in the Fundamental Rules issued by the Government of 
India applicable to the Central Government servants. 
Fundamental Rule 56(a) provides that except as otherwise 
provided in this Rule, every Government servant shall 
retire from service on the afternoon of the last day of the 
month in which he attains the age of fifty-eight years. 
Fundamental Rule 56(j) is similar to Rule 161(aa)(1) of 
the Bombay Civil Services Rules conferring an absolute 
right on the appropriate authority to retire a Government 
servant by giving not less than three months’ notice. 
Under Fundamental Rule 56(k) the Government servant 
is entitled to retire from service after he has attained the 
age of fifty-five years by giving notice of not less than 
three months in writing to the appropriate authority on 
attaining the age specified. But proviso (b) to sub-rule 
56(k) states that it is open to the appropriate authority 
to withhold permission to a Government servant under 
suspension who seeks to retire under this clause. 
Thus under the Fundamental Rules issued by the 
Government of India also the right to the Government 
servant to retire is not an absolute right but is subject to 
the proviso whereunder the appropriate authority may 
withhold permission to a Government servant under 
suspension. On a consideration to Rule 161(2)(ii) and 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
53
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
the proviso, we are satisfied that it is incumbent on 
the Government to communicate to the Government 
servant its decision to withhold permission to retire 
on one to the grounds specified in the proviso.
11.  In the view we have taken that the appointing 
authority has no jurisdiction to take disciplinary 
proceedings against a Government servant who had 
effectively retired, the question as to whether the 
High Court was right in holding that the disciplinary 
authority had sufficient grounds for dismissing the 
Appellant does not arise. 
…..As already stated, as we have come to the conclusion 
that the disciplinary action cannot be taken after the date 
of his retirement, we refrain from expressing any opinion 
on the correctness of the decision taken by the appointing 
authority.” 
In the said context, it is evident that until the appointing authority 
withholds the permission to let an employee voluntarily retire, 
pendency of disciplinary proceedings against such Government 
servant has no adverse consequence. Therefore, withholding 
permission in terms of the rules was found to be a prerequisite.
24.	 Both the above referred judgments have been further cited with 
approval in the case of Union of India and Ors. v. Sayed Muzaffar 
Mir 8 and the Court held as thus: -
“3. The learned Additional Solicitor General, Shri Ahmed 
appearing for the Appellants, has contended that the 
right of premature retirement conferred by the aforesaid 
provision could be denied to a railway servant in case 
he be under suspension, as was the Respondent at the 
relevant time. This is what finds place in the proviso to 
the aforesaid provision. The Additional Solicitor General 
also seeks to place reliance on what has been stated in 
Rule 1801(d) which starts with non-obstante clause and 
states that the competent authority may require a railway 
8	
(1995) Supp. 1 SCC 76

54
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
servant under suspension to continue his service beyond 
the date of his retirement in which case he shall not be 
permitted by that authority to retire from service and 
shall be retained in service till such time as required by 
that authority. Relying on these provisions the contention 
advanced is that though the Respondent had sought 
premature retirement by his letter dated 22-7-1985 and 
though the three months’ period had expired on 21-10-
1985, the Railways were within the rights not to permit the 
premature retirement because of the suspension of the 
Respondent at the relevant time, which had come to be 
ordered in the course of a disciplinary proceeding which 
was then pending against the Respondent.
4. There are two answers to this submission. The first 
is that both the provisions relied upon by the learned 
counsel would require, according to us, passing of 
appropriate order, when the government servant is 
under suspension (as was the Respondent), either 
of withholding permission to retire or retaining of the 
incumbent in service. It is an admitted fact that no such 
order had been passed in the present case. So, despite 
the right given to the appropriate/competent authority 
in this regard, the same is of no avail in the present 
case as the right had not come to be exercised. We 
do not know the reason(s) thereof. May be, for some 
reason the authority concerned thought that it would 
be better to see off the Respondent by allowing him 
to retire.
5. The second aspect of the matter is that it has been 
held by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in  Dinesh 
Chandra Sangma v. State of Assam [(1977) 4 SCC 441 : 
1978 SCC (L&S) 7] , which has dealt with a pari materia 
provision finding place in Rule 56(c) of the Fundamental 
Rules, that where the government servant seeks premature 
retirement the same does not require any acceptance and 
comes into effect on the completion of the notice period. 
This decision was followed by another three-Judge Bench 
in B.J. Shelat v. State of Gujarat [(1978) 2 SCC 202 : 1978 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
55
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
SCC (L&S) 208].
6. The period of notice in the present case having expired 
on 21-10-1985, and the first order of removal having been 
passed on 4-11-1985, we hold that the Tribunal had rightly 
come to the conclusion that the order of removal was non 
est in the eye of law.” 
25.	 In another case of S.K. Singhal (Supra), this Court was having an 
occasion to consider the pari materia provision of Punjab Civil Services 
Rules wherein the rule contemplates about “notice to retire” and “not a 
request seeking permission to retire”. In the said case, this Court has 
relied upon the above referred three judgments and held as thus: -
“13. Thus, from the aforesaid three decisions it is clear 
that if the right to voluntarily retire is conferred in absolute 
terms as in Dinesh Chandra Sangma case [(1977) 4 SCC 
441 : 1978 SCC (L&S) 7] by the relevant rules and there is 
no provision in the rules to withhold permission in certain 
contingencies the voluntary retirement comes into effect 
automatically on the expiry of the period specified in the 
notice. If, however, as in B.J. Shelat case [(1978) 2 SCC 
202 : 1978 SCC (L&S) 208] and as in Sayed Muzaffar 
Mir case [1995 Supp (1) SCC 76 : 1995 SCC (L&S) 256] 
the authority concerned is empowered to withhold 
permission to retire if certain conditions exist, viz., in 
case the employee is under suspension or in case a 
departmental enquiry is pending or is contemplated, 
the mere pendency of the suspension or departmental 
enquiry or its contemplation does not result in the 
notice for voluntary retirement not coming into effect 
on the expiry of the period specified. What is further 
needed is that the authority concerned must pass a 
positive order withholding permission to retire and 
must also communicate the same to the employee 
as stated in B.J. Shelat case [(1978) 2 SCC 202 : 1978 
SCC (L&S) 208] and in Sayed Muzaffar Mir case [1995 
Supp (1) SCC 76 : 1995 SCC (L&S) 256] before the 
expiry of the notice period. Consequently, there is no 
requirement of an order of acceptance of the notice to 
be communicated to the employee nor can it be said that 

56
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
non-communication of acceptance should be treated as 
amounting to withholding of permission.” 
14. Before referring to the second category of cases where 
the rules require a positive acceptance of the notice of 
voluntary retirement and communication thereof, it is 
necessary to refer to the decision of this Court in Baljit 
Singh (Dr) v. State of Haryana [(1997) 1 SCC 754 : 1997 
SCC (L&S) 313] strongly relied upon by the learned counsel 
for the Appellants and to Power Finance Corpn. Ltd. v. 
Pramod Kumar Bhatia [(1997) 4 SCC 280 : 1997 SCC 
(L&S) 941] . The former case arose under Rule 5.32(B) of 
the Punjab Civil Services Rules. That rule extracted earlier 
contains an express provision in the proviso to sub-rule 
(2) that the retirement takes effect automatically if refusal 
is not communicated within 3 months. In that case, when 
the employee gave notice for voluntary retirement on 20-
9-1993, criminal cases were pending against him. After 
expiry of 3 months, on 25-2-1994, the competent authority 
declined to accept the notice. A two-Judge Bench of this 
Court, however, held that the voluntary retirement did not 
come about automatically on the expiry of the notice period 
but that it could take effect only upon acceptance of the 
notice by the Government and that the acceptance must 
also be communicated and till then the jural relationship 
of master and servant continues. This Court referred only 
to the decision of the two-Judge Bench in Sayed Muzaffar 
Mir case [1995 Supp (1) SCC 76 : 1995 SCC (L&S) 256] 
and stated that that case was to be confined to its own 
facts. The two-Judge Bench of this Court in Baljit 
Singh case [(1997) 1 SCC 754 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 313] 
did not notice that there were two three-Judge Bench 
cases in Dinesh Chandra Sangma [(1977) 4 SCC 441 
: 1978 SCC (L&S) 7] and Shelat [(1978) 2 SCC 202 : 
1978 SCC (L&S) 208] taking the view under similar 
rules that a positive order was to be passed within the 
notice period withholding permission to retire and that 
the said order was also to be communicated to the 
employee during the said period. By stating that an order 
of acceptance of the notice was necessary and that the 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
57
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
said acceptance must be communicated to the employee 
and till that was done the jural relationship continued and 
there was no automatic snapping thereof on the expiry of 
3 months’ period, the two-Judge Bench, in our view, has 
gone contrary to the two three-Judge Bench cases which 
were not brought to its notice. In the above circumstances, 
we follow the two three-Judge Bench cases for deciding 
the case before us.”
26.	 After taking clue from the above judgments, if we look into the 
language of Regulation 29(2) of the Pension Regulation which 
deals with the voluntary retirement, acceptance of the notice by the 
appointing authority is subject to compliance of proviso, whereby 
refusal to let the employee retire voluntarily ought to be ordered 
before expiry of the notice period, and communicate, otherwise, in 
terms of proviso to Regulation 29(2), voluntary retirement shall be 
deemed to be effective on lapse of the notice period. Therefore, a 
positive act of passing an order of refusal is required to be undertaken 
by the appointing authority. 
27.	 In the judgment of Tek Chand (Supra) decided by another Three-
Judge Bench, this Court has considered all the above referred 
judgments and in the context of the language used in the proviso 
to sub-rule (2) of Rule 48-A of the Central Services Pension Rules, 
1972 dealing with the voluntary retirement, the Court in paragraphs 
33 and 35, held as thus: - 
“33.  It is clear from sub-rule (2) of the Rule that the 
appointing authority is required to accept the notice of 
voluntary retirement given under sub-rule (1). It is open 
to the appointing authority to refuse also, on whatever 
grounds available to it, but such refusal has to be before 
the expiry of the period specified in the notice. The 
proviso to sub-rule (2) is clear and certain in its terms. 
If the appointing authority does not refuse to grant the 
permission for retirement before the expiry of the period 
specified in the said notice, the retirement sought for 
becomes effective from the date of expiry of the said 
period. In this case, admittedly, the appointing authority 
did not refuse to grant the permission for retirement to 
Nikka Ram before the expiry of the period specified in 

58
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the notice dated 5-12-1994. The learned Senior Counsel 
for the Respondent argued that the acceptance of 
voluntary retirement by appointing authority in all cases 
is mandatory. In the absence of such express acceptance 
the government servant continues to be in service. In 
support of this submission, he drew our attention to Rule 
56(k) of the Fundamental Rules. He also submitted that 
acceptance may be on a later date, that is, even after 
the expiry of the period specified in the notice and the 
retirement could be effective from the date specified in the 
notice. Since the proviso to sub-rule (2) of Rule 48-A is 
clear in itself and the said Rule 48-A is self-contained, in 
our opinion, it is unnecessary to look to other provisions, 
more so in the light of law laid down by this Court. An 
argument that acceptance can be even long after 
the date of the expiry of the period specified in the 
notice and that the voluntary retirement may become 
effective from the date specified in the notice, will lead 
to anomalous situation. Take a case, if an application 
for voluntary retirement is accepted few years later from 
the date specified in the notice and voluntary retirement 
becomes operative from the date of expiry of the notice 
period itself, what would be the position or status of such 
a government servant during the period from the date of 
expiry of the notice period up to the date of acceptance 
of the voluntary retirement by the appointing authority? 
One either continues in service or does not continue in 
service. It cannot be both that the voluntary retirement 
could be effective from the date of expiry of the period 
mentioned in the notice and still a government servant 
could continue in service till the voluntary retirement is 
accepted. The proviso to sub-rule (2) of Rule 48-A of the 
Rules does not admit such situation.
35. In our view, this judgment fully supports the contention 
urged on behalf of the Appellant in this regard. In this 
judgment, it is observed that there are three categories 
of rules relating to seeking of voluntary retirement 
after notice. In the first category, voluntary retirement 
automatically comes into force on expiry of notice 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
59
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
period. In the second category also, retirement comes 
into force unless an order is passed during notice 
period withholding permission to retire and in the 
third category voluntary retirement does not come 
into force unless permission to this effect is granted 
by the competent authority. In such a case, refusal 
of permission can be communicated even after the 
expiry of the notice period. It all depends upon the 
relevant rules. In the case decided, the relevant Rule 
required acceptance of notice by appointing authority 
and the proviso to the Rule further laid down that 
retirement shall come into force automatically if the 
appointing authority did not refuse permission during 
the notice period. Refusal was not communicated 
to the Respondent during the notice period and the 
Court held that voluntary retirement came into force 
on expiry of the notice period and subsequent order 
conveyed to him that he could not be deemed to have 
voluntary retired had no effect. The present case is 
almost identical to the one decided by this Court in the 
aforesaid decision.”
28.	 In the above mentioned precedents, the pari materia provisions 
dealing with the contingency of voluntary retirement have been dealt 
with and it was made clear that subject to applicable law, the request 
if not refused within the period specified in the notice or withheld, 
the deemed approval of voluntary retirement would be effective on 
expiry of notice period.
29.	 There may be three contingencies for the employees with respect of 
retirement. First is on attaining the age of superannuation; second 
would be a situation of compulsory retirement in public interest and 
third is where an employee sought retirement voluntarily indicating 
his intention to cease the master-servant relationship. In the third 
contingency, subject to applicable regulations or rules, where an 
employee voluntarily ceases the employment and indicates his 
intention in the notice of voluntary retirement, until it is refused or 
withheld by an order within the notice period, the intention of the 
employee would become effective from the date as specified by him. 
Meaning thereby, if an employee voluntarily wishes to severe his 
relationship with employer, and by virtue of rule, the prescription is 

60
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
not followed, i.e., requiring the authorities to indicate their intention to 
refuse the request, as per deemed approval clause, in our opinion, 
the request becomes effective ipso facto. 
30.	 In the case at hand, the notice of three months indicating intention 
to retire voluntarily was given on 04.10.2010 and the period was 
supposed to expire on 04.01.2011, to which refusal was not ordered 
within the notice period. The non-approval communicated on 
29.06.2011, after expiry of the notice period and cessation of work 
vide notice dated 14.05.2011 with effect from 16.05.2011, is of no 
avail to the bank. 
31.	 Reverting to the arguments as advanced by the Appellant, relying upon 
Regulation 20(3)(ii) of Service Regulation, it sets forth an embargo 
upon an officer against leaving or discontinuing or resigning from 
service of bank without giving a notice in writing. The said provision 
is relevant, therefore, reproduced for ready reference as under: -
“20. Termination of Service. – 
(1) **** **** ****
(2) **** **** ****
(3) (i) An officer against whom disciplinary proceedings 
are pending shall not leave/discontinue or resign from his 
service in the bank without the prior approval in writing 
of competent authority and any notice or resignation 
given by such an officer before or during the disciplinary 
proceedings shall not take effect unless it is accepted by 
the Competent Authority.
(ii) Disciplinary proceedings shall deemed to be pending 
against any employee for the purpose of this regulation 
if he has been placed under suspension or any notice 
has been issued to him to show cause why disciplinary 
proceedings shall not be instituted against him and will 
be deemed to be pending until final orders are passed by 
the Competent Authority.
(iii) The officer against whom disciplinary proceedings 
have been initiated will cease to be in service on the date 
of superannuation but the disciplinary proceedings will 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
61
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
continue as if he was in service until the proceedings are 
concluded and final order is passed in respect thereof. 
The concerned officer will not receive any pay and/or 
allowance after the date of superannuation. He will also 
not be entitled for the payment of retirement benefits till 
the proceedings are completed and final order is passed 
thereon except his own contributions to CPF.”
32.	 Upon reading, it is discernable that if disciplinary proceedings against 
an officer are pending and he wishes to leave/discontinue or resign, 
he may be permitted to do so by prior approval of the competent 
authority in writing. Such notice, if any, given by the officer before 
or during the disciplinary proceedings, shall not be given effect 
unless accepted by the competent authority. The pendency of the 
disciplinary proceedings would include suspension or issuance of 
a show-cause notice for institution of the disciplinary proceedings. 
Regulation 20(3)(iii) of the Service Regulation applies where the 
disciplinary proceedings were initiated prior to attaining the age 
of superannuation, and prescribes the recourse to the bank after 
attaining the age of superannuation, which is not of much relevance 
in the facts of this case. 
33.	 The argument as advanced to apply Regulation 20(3)(i) and 20(3)(ii) 
of the Service Regulation may have some relevance as it imposes 
embargo upon an officer against ‘leaving or discontinuing or resigning’ 
from service without the prior approval of the authority if disciplinary 
proceedings are pending. It also provides what would mean by 
pendency of disciplinary proceedings. As discussed, Regulation 
29 of Pension Regulation governs the voluntary retirement and its 
acceptance until refused by the appointing authority within notice 
period, otherwise it would become effective on lapse of the time 
specified in the notice. 
34.	 Looking at the provision of Regulation 20(3)(i), (ii), (iii) of Service 
Regulations and Regulation 29(1) and (2) of the Pension Regulation, 
it ought to be read in tandem harmoniously. Regulation 20(3)(i) & 
(ii) of the Service Regulation deals with cessation of service and 
when it would not affect the pendency of disciplinary proceedings. 
It puts an embargo only in two specific contingencies, first, where 
the officer is placed under suspension, second, where a show-cause 
notice has been issued for institution of disciplinary proceedings. In 

62
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
either of the situation, an officer would require prior approval of the 
competent authority. Indeed it is true that voluntary retirement is also 
a mode to ‘leave or discontinue’ service, therefore to such extent, 
Regulation 20(3)(i) & (ii) may have relevance. Nonetheless, voluntary 
retirement is not a mere act of leaving or discontinuing, rather, a 
distinct right of an employee that is available on completion of the 
requisite number of years of service, etc. For exercising the option 
of voluntary retirement, Regulation 29 of the Pension Regulation 
is the main provision. Given the situation, without considering both 
provisions harmoniously, otherwise, this leads to an anomalous 
situation. We say so because as per intent of Regulation 20(3)(i) & 
(ii), the employee cannot leave without approval of the competent 
authority pending the disciplinary proceedings irrespective of the fact 
that he has tendered notice to that effect. However, on literal reading 
of proviso to Regulation 29(2) of Pension Regulation, the intent 
thereof seems to be otherwise i.e., unless refused by the competent 
authority within the period prescribed in the notice, the voluntary 
retirement shall become automatically effective. It is in this context 
provisions of both regulations ought to be harmoniously constructed. 
35.	 Under Regulation 20(3)(i) & (ii) of Service Regulation, competent 
authority can retain the employee against whom disciplinary 
proceedings are pending, unless permitted. At the same time, 
Regulation 29(2) of the Pension Regulation requires acceptance 
of the notice of voluntary retirement by authority. Nonetheless, 
its proviso contemplates that the notice for voluntary retirement 
becomes effective unless positively refused by the competent 
authority. On said reading, the intent can be gathered that while 
drafting Regulation 29 of Pension Regulation, the intent of Regulation 
20(3)(i) and (ii) of Service Regulation has been duly taken care 
of, albeit in a different language. While Regulation 20(3)(i) & (ii) 
of Service Regulation permits the authority to not grant ‘approval’ 
where disciplinary proceedings are pending; Regulation 29 of 
Pension Regulation also achieves the same effectively, through its 
proviso, by permitting the authority to ‘refuse’ voluntary retirement, 
but within the notice period. Therefore, essence and intent are the 
same subject to some restrictions. In this manner, said provisions 
are to be applied harmoniously. 
36.	 Now reverting to the argument of issuance of the show cause notice 
dated 11.11.2010 is concerned, such notice must indicate the intention 

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
63
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
of institution of disciplinary proceedings, to trigger the embargo under 
Regulation 20(3)(ii) of the Service Regulation. For understanding the 
nature and context of the show-cause notice dated 11.11.2010, its 
relevant operative part is reproduced hereunder: -
“Due to above action M/s. Progressive Exim Ltd. is 
aggrieved on the Bank and the Bank’s image has suffered. 
Since money was withdrawn from Current account of M/s. 
Bhanu Road Carriers, which was not belonging to them, 
the Bank was out of fund for a period from 08/10/2008 
to 02/06/2010.
You are advised to submit your explanation within seven 
days from the receipt of this letter. If no reply received 
from you it will be construed that you have nothing 
to say in the matter and further course of action will 
be taken against you.” 
37.	 After reading the operative portion as above, it is clear, an explanation 
vis-à-vis allegations was sought from the officer and in absence of 
which, bank was to take further recourse. In our view, the aforesaid 
content of show cause notice, is not suggestive of the intention to 
institute disciplinary action. Mere mention of ‘further course of action’ 
cannot be construed as intention to institute disciplinary proceedings. 
Therefore, even said contention of the Appellant falls flat.
38.	 Insofar as reliance is placed on the judgments of R.L. Capoor – I 
(Supra) and its review in R.L. Capoor – II (Supra), it is necessary 
to understand its factual matrix. In the said case, the employee 
was working as a Branch Manager in UCO Bank and was allowed 
to superannuate on 1-11-1996. Prior to his retirement, only show-
cause notices were issued to him on 24-10-1996 and 30-10-1996 
in connection with alleged irregularities committed while sanctioning 
and disbursing loans under the PMRY Scheme. A charge-sheet was 
issued only on 13-11-1998, nearly two years after his superannuation, 
and upon conclusion of enquiry, the penalty of removal from service 
was imposed, which was also affirmed in appeal. The Respondent’s 
writ petition was allowed in part by the High Court, which converted 
the penalty into compulsory retirement, and the LPA preferred by 
the Bank was dismissed, taking the matter to this Court. 
39.	 In the judgment of R.L. Capoor – I (Supra), this Court dismissed the 

64
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Bank’s appeal and held the entire disciplinary proceeding is illegal 
and without jurisdiction on the ground that Regulation 20(3)(iii) of 
the Service Regulation could be invoked only when disciplinary 
proceedings had been initiated prior to superannuation, and since 
initiation of a proceeding is only upon issuance of a charge-sheet and 
not merely upon a show-cause notice, the legal fiction thereunder 
could not be attracted. 
40.	 The Bank thereafter filed a Review Petition, giving rise to the judgment 
of R.L. Capoor – II (Supra), seeking to rely upon Regulation 20(3)(ii) 
of the Service Regulation. The review petition was dismissed and this 
Court held that the legal fiction of deemed pendency under Regulation 
20(3)(ii) of the Service Regulation is of limited scope, operating only 
to prevent an officer from resigning during such proceedings, and 
cannot be extended to constitute initiation of disciplinary proceedings 
for purposes of Regulation 20(3)(iii). 
41.	 In both of these cases, therefore, this Court primarily examined the 
scope and import of Regulations 20(3)(i), 20(3)(ii) and 20(3)(iii) of 
the Service Regulation, and elaborated upon the meaning of the 
legal fiction as created by the expression ‘deemed to be pending’. 
Therefore, both these judgements only dealt with a very specific issue 
i.e., applicability of legal fiction contained in Regulation 20(3)(ii) for 
the purpose of Regulation 20(3)(iii). As such, we find ourselves in 
agreement with the submission made by the learned amicus that 
R.L. Capoor - I (Supra) and R.L. Capoor – II (Supra) only deals 
with the contingency of Regulation 20(3)(iii) and do not apply on the 
facts of the present case.
42.	 The view taken in RL Capoor – I (Supra) and R.L. Capoor - II (Supra) 
has also been reiterated in the judgment of D.R.P. Sundharam 
(Supra) by a Three-Judge Bench of this Court. It is to observe here 
that in neither of these judgements the effect of the Regulation 29 of 
Pension Regulation has been considered. More so, all the judgments 
relate to the Regulation 20(3)(iii) of the Service Regulation without 
dealing with the purport of Regulation 20(3)(i) & (ii) of Service 
Regulation which is applicable to the facts of the case at hand. 
Judgements of this Court in State Bank of India & Ors. v. Navin 
Kumar Sinha9 and UCO Bank & Ors. v. M.B.Motwani (Dead) thr. 
9	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3369

[2026] 5 S.C.R. 
65
UCO Bank & Ors. v. SK Shrivastava
L.Rs and Ors10, dealt with the cases involving retirement on attaining 
the age of superannuation and the dispute was adjudicated in light 
of R.L.Capoor – I (Supra), R.L.Capoor – II (Supra) and D.R.P. 
Sudharam (Supra). As such, these judgements will not have any 
implication on the fact of the present appeals.
43.	 In light of the discussions made above and by applying the rule of 
harmonious construction with respect to the interplay of the said 
provisions of the Pension Regulation and the Service Regulation, 
the situation as emerges is that the officer submitted his notice of 
voluntary retirement on 04.10.2010, giving three months’ notice as 
required, which would be effective till 04.01.2011. In the meantime, a 
show cause notice was issued by the Appellant on 11.11.2010 and as 
discussed, it would not indicate the intention to institute disciplinary 
proceedings in terms of Regulation 20(3)(ii) of the Service Regulation. 
Nonetheless, the existence of such a show cause notice itself is not 
sufficient without refusal by competent authority to stop the automatic 
operation of the notice of voluntary retirement. In absence, the 
notice of voluntary retirement would take its course. In the present 
case, no such order of refusal or order of withholding was passed 
by the competent authority within the stipulated period. The notice 
of voluntary retirement, therefore, became effective automatically by 
efflux of time upon the expiry of the three-month period on 04.01.2011. 
This Court, accordingly, finds no infirmity in the view taken by the 
High Court, which is liable to be upheld.
44.	 Before parting with this judgment, we deem it necessary to place 
on record our appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered 
by learned Amicus Curiae Mr. Gaurav Agrawal, Senior Advocate by 
way of filing erudite submissions, therefore, we acknowledge his 
assistance and place the same on record.
CONCLUSION
45.	 In the light of discussion made hereinabove, in our view, while 
passing the impugned judgment, the High Court has not committed 
any infirmity. The judgment rendered by the High Court is after a 
thorough examination of facts and applicable regulations, therefore, 
the conclusion drawn as such is in right perspective. In our view, it 
10	
(2024) 13 SCC 109

66
[2026] 5 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
is correct to hold that when an employee decides to severe master 
servant relationship and serves a notice indicating such intention 
specifying the period, by operation of law it will become effective 
in absence of any order of refusal. The subsequent act of issuing 
chargesheet and consequential order of dismissal is also not justified 
in law. As directed by the High Court, the Respondent shall be entitled 
to all consequential post-retiral benefits in terms of this order as well. 
The Bank is directed to settle all the dues within a period of three 
months along with applicable interest rate. Accordingly, the appeals 
filed by the Appellant-Bank fail and are, hereby, dismissed.
46.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
