[2026] 2 S.C.R. 558 : 2026 INSC 121
P. Suresh
v.
D.Kalaivani & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 739 of 2026)
03 February 2026
[Aravind Kumar and N.V. Anjaria,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Could the High Court entertain an application invoking and exercising 
its powers of superintendence u/Art.227 of the Constitution, even 
where a specific remedial provision available in the Code of Civil 
Procedure Code, 1908 (CPC) relating to the subject matter – issue 
is the focal point arising to be addressed in the present appeal.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.227 – Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 – Or.VII R.11, Or.VI R.16 – Supervisory jurisdiction of High 
Court – What is challenged in this appeal at the instance of the 
appellant-original plaintiff, is the judgment and order passed 
by the High Court dated 03.06.2025 in CRP No.3197 of 2024 
and CMP No.17106 of 2024, which were the proceedings of the 
Civil Revision Petition filed by the defendant u/Art.227 of the 
Constitution, whereby, the High Court allowed the Revision 
Petition and struck off the plaint in Original Suit No.93 of 2020 
before the Court of District Munsif – Correctness:
Held: In the garb of exercising supervisory jurisdiction u/Art.227 
of the Constitution, the High Court is not expected to engulf the 
specific statutory remedy or provision in law and, thus, become a 
supervisor over the court below or the tribunal, as the case may 
be – It would be a legally wise exercise of discretion for the High 
Court to adopt and adhere to such self-imposed discipline and 
to insist that the aggrieved party should take recourse to such 
alternative remedy or statutory provision available in law – Embargo 
in this regard would have to be construed as near total when 
provision is available in CPC – It is held, therefore, that once the 
specific provision u/Or.VII, R.11 of the CPC, is available, the High 
Court cannot exercise powers u/Art.227 to reject or strike off the 
* Author

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
559
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
plaint – For such relief, the specific provision u/Or.VII, R.11, CPC, 
will have to be resorted to, on the grounds mentioned in the said 
provision – In adopting such approach, the High Court would be 
giving due regard to the legislative intent – When the legislature 
has enacted specific remedial provision to be taken recourse to 
by the person aggrieved to challenge the orders and decisions of 
the court to seek redress in law accordingly that remedy alone will 
have to be sought for – This court is of the view that High Court 
committed a manifest error in exercising its powers u/Art.227 of 
the Constitution to strike down the plaint – It ought to have asked 
the defendant to take recourse to, in accordance with law, when 
specific provisions available in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
in the nature of Or.VII, R.11 – The impugned judgment and order 
of the High Court, therefore, is set aside – Consequently, the suit 
is restored to its original file. [Paras 7.3, 7.4, 8-11]
Constitution of India – Art.227 – Superintendence over all 
courts – Explained:
Held: Art.227 of the Constitution invests the power of superintendence 
over all courts by the High Court – Sub-Article (1) thereof provides 
that every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts 
and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it 
exercises jurisdiction – As per sub-Article (2), without prejudice to 
the generality of the provisions in sub-Article (1), the High Court 
may (a) call for returns from such courts; (b) make and issue 
general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the practice and 
proceedings of such courts and (c) prescribe forms in which the 
books and accounts etc. to be kept by the officers of courts – As 
per sub-Article (3), the High Court may also settle tables of fees – 
Sub-Article (4) provides that nothing in the Article shall deem to 
confer on a High Court powers of superintendence over any court 
or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed 
Forces – The reserve of exceptional power of judicial intervention 
is not to be exercised just for granting of relief in individual cases 
but should be directed for the promotion of public confidence in 
the administration of justice – It is emphasized that though the 
power u/Art.227 may be unfettered, its exercise is subject to high 
degree of judicial discipline. [Paras 5, 5.1.1]
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – Or.VI, R.16 – Or.VII, R.11 – 
Discussed. [Paras 6.1-6.2.1]

560
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Law Cited
State v. Navjot Sandhu [2005] Supp. 2 SCR 79 : (2003) 6 SCC 
641; K. Valarmathi and Ors. v. Kumaresan [2025] 4 SCR 2461 : 
2025 SCC OnLine SC 985; Virudhunagar Hindu Nadargal Dharma 
Paribalana Sabai and Others v. Tuticorin Educational Society and 
Others [2019] 13 SCR 634 : (2019) 9 SCC 538; Radhey Shyam v. 
Chhabi Nath [2015] 3 SCR 197 : (2015) 5 SCC 423 – relied on.
Shalini Shyam Shetty v. Rajendra Shankar Patil [2010] 8 SCR 836 : 
(2010) 8 SCC 329; A. Venkateshubbiah Naidu v. S. Chellappan 
[2000] Supp. 3 SCR 303 : (2000) 7 SCC 695; Rajendra Diwan v. 
Pradeep Kumar Ranibala and Anr. [2019] 17 SCR 1089 : (2019) 
20 SCC 143; Surya Dev Rai v. Ram Chander Rai [2003] Supp. 
2 SCR 290 : (2003) 6 SCC 675 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
List of Keywords
Article 227 of Constitution of India; Alternative remedy; Order VII, 
Rule 11 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; Order VI, Rule 16 of Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908; Triable issues; Supervisory jurisdiction; 
Specific remedial provision; Extraordinary power; Statutory remedy; 
Discretion; Injunction; Rejection of plaint; Striking out pleadings; 
Manifest error; Court of appeal; Miscarriage of justice; Judicial 
intervention; Judicial discipline.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 739 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 03.06.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in CRP No. 3197 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Abdulla Naseeh V.T., Ms. Abreeda Banu, Ms. Rachel Sara James.
Adv. for the Respondent(s):
V Prabhakar, Sr. Adv., S. Rajappa, Ms. Jyoti Parashar, 
R Gowrishankar, Ms. G Dhivyasri, Naanchil J Deekshith.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
561
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
N.V. Anjaria, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
Could the High Court entertain an application invoking and exercising 
its powers of superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution, 
even where a specific remedial provision available in the Code of Civil 
Procedure Code, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as ‘CPC’) relating to 
the subject matter – issue is the focal point arising to be addressed 
in the present appeal.
2.1	 What is challenged in this appeal at the instance of the appellant - 
original plaintiff, is the judgment and order passed by the High 
Court of Madras dated 03.06.2025 in CRP No. 3197 of 2024 
and CMP No. 17106 of 2024, which were the proceedings of 
the Civil Revision Petition filed by the defendant under Article 
227 of the Constitution, whereby, the High Court allowed the 
Revision Petition and struck off the plaint in Original Suit No. 
93 of 2020 before the Court of District Munsif, Tambaram.
3.	
Outlining the facts would be relevant to notice the case pleaded in the 
plaint. The suit instituted by the appellant-plaintiff before the District 
Munsif Court, Tambaram was for the relief of permanent injunction 
against the defendants and their agents from interfering with the 
possession and enjoyment of the suit property by the plaintiff. The 
suit property comprised of Survey No. 125/1A, Survey No. 125/1C, 
and Survey No. 230/1B, which was described in their specified 
boundaries of Patta No. 320.
3.1	 The case of the plaintiff was that the land originally belonged to 
one Sambandam Chettiar, who sold the same to the mother of 
the appellant named Meena under a registered sale deed dated 
20.10.1975, Document No. 3994 of 1975. The said Meena - 
wife of Paramasivam, was in exclusive possession of the suit 
property and she died intestate on 07.12.1985. It was further 
averred that the plaintiff as her sole legal heir inherited the 
property and has been in exclusive possession and enjoyment 
of the same and further that the plaintiff got revenue records 
mutated in his favour in Patta No. 11941. 

562
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
3.1.1	 It was further averred in the plaint that the suit property, 
an open land, was to be bound by the fence. It was 
stated that at that time, defendant No. 2 trespassed and 
prevented the plaintiff from erecting the fence. It was 
averred that the defendants claimed to be the relatives 
of Sambandam Chettiar. The plaintiff stated that since 
the defendants threatened to encroach upon the suit 
property, the cause of action arose for instituting the 
Original Suit No. 93 of 2020.
3.2	 In the written statement filed by the defendants, the transaction 
of sale in favour of the plaintiff’s mother Meena was disputed 
by contending that the sale document was fabricated. It was 
sought to be contended that the certified copy of the sale deed 
filed along with the plaint used to be the property of another 
document and further that the sale deed was not signed by the 
said Sambandam Chettiar. It was the case of the defendants 
that the document did not pertain to the suit sale but it was a 
mortgage deed executed by a third party. 
3.2.1	 It was then contended that the said Sambandam Chettiar 
and his mother owned the suit property which they had 
purchased in the years 1922 and 1928 under registered 
sale deeds, and that agricultural operations were carried 
out in the lands using the services of coolies. The 
defendants contended that in the year 1940, when their 
mother died, all the properties were inherited and that 
they were in possession and enjoyment of the same. 
It was stated that in the year 2020, the defendants 
tendered kist for the land covered under Patta No. 320, 
but the Village Administrative Officer refused to receive 
the same, stating that the ownership of the land/Patta 
had changed.
3.3	 By raising the above and other contentions, the defendants put 
forward their case inter alia that the question of trespassing 
into the suit property by them did not arise as the title of the 
property belonged to them and that the case of the plaintiff for 
injunction was based on fabricated documents and that the 
suit was fraudulent. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
563
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
3.4	 In the Civil Revision Petition filed before the High Court under 
Article 227 of the Constitution by the defendants, it was 
contended that although the plaintiff was claiming exclusive 
title over the property, he did not seek the declaration of his 
title. The principles of exercising powers under Order VII Rule 
11, CPC and the provisions of Order VI Rule 16 of CPC were 
pressed into service on behalf of the defendant-petitioners, 
praying before the High Court to strike off the plaint in exercise 
of powers under Article 227 of the Constitution.
3.5	 The High Court noted the case and averments, the defence of 
the defendants, and proceeded to record finding that the certified 
copy of the sale deed produced by the plaintiff pertained to some 
third party and did not relate to the plaintiff. The High Court further 
recorded a finding that the document was a forged document 
and that the suit filed by the plaintiff was a false suit. According 
to the High Court, since the suit was once dismissed for default 
on 05.07.2022 and the plaintiff did not take any steps for about 
a year, it showed that the plaintiff did not show interest for long, 
and that it implied that the defence of the defendants was a 
valid defence. The High Court viewed that the ground of fraud 
was substantially established by the defendants. According to 
the High Court, the continuation of the suit was not necessary. 
On such grounds, the High Court exercised its Constitutional 
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution, allowed the 
civil revision petition, and struck off the plaint.
4.	
Heard learned advocate Mr. Abdulla Naseeh for the petitioner and 
learned senior advocate Mr. V. Prabhakar with learned advocate on 
record Mr. S. Rajappa for the respondents, at length.
4.1	 By referring to various judgments of this Court, it was submitted 
on behalf of the appellant that the High Court was not justified 
in the facts of the case in exercising the powers under Article 
227 of the Constitution and pursuant to exercise of such powers, 
to set aside the plaint. It was submitted that the powers under 
Article 227 of the Constitution are supervisory, to be exercised 
sparingly. More particularly, when specific provision in the form 
of Order VII Rule 11, CPC exists in the statute book under which 
the defendant could have filed its application, a manifest error 
was committed by the High Court, it was submitted.

564
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
4.2	 Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, 
submitted that the supervisory powers of the High Court under 
Article 227 are wide enough and when the High Court found 
that the suit-plaint was liable to be struck off, no exception 
could be taken for invoking the powers. Learned counsel for 
the respondent also referred to the provision of Order VI Rule 
16, CPC, which permits the Court to strike off the pleadings.
5.	
Article 227 of the Constitution invests the power of superintendence 
over all courts by the High Court. Sub-Article(1) thereof provides that 
every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and 
tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises 
jurisdiction. As per sub-Article(2), without prejudice to the generality 
of the provisions in sub-Article (1), the High Court may (a) call for 
returns from such courts; (b) make and issue general rules and 
prescribe forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of such 
courts and (c) prescribe forms in which the books and accounts etc. 
to be kept by the officers of courts. As per sub-Article (3), the High 
Court may also settle tables of fees. Sub-Article (4) provides that 
nothing in the Article shall deem to confer on a High Court powers 
of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by or under 
any law relating to the Armed Forces. 
5.1	 The scope, ambit, amplitude and nature of the powers of a High 
Court under Article 227 of the Constitution are discussed and 
delineated by this Court in catena of decisions. Article 227 is 
perceived to be a custodian of justice, which is in the nature 
of extraordinary supervisory powers, discretionary in nature. In 
Shalini Shyam Shetty vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil1, this Court 
cautioned that an improper and frequent exercise of this power 
will be counterproductive and would divest this extraordinary 
power of its strength and vitality. It was observed that this 
discretionary power has to be exercised very sparingly.
5.1.1	 The reserve of exceptional power of judicial intervention 
is not to be exercised just for granting of relief in 
individual cases but should be directed for the promotion 
of public confidence in the administration of justice. It is 
emphasized that though the power under Article 227 may 
1	
(2010) 8 SCC 329

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
565
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
be unfettered, its exercise is subject to high degree of 
judicial discipline. The Court observed in Shalini Shyam 
Shetty (supra), ‘The power of interference under Article 
227 is to be kept to the minimum to ensure that the wheel 
of justice does not come to halt and the foundation of 
justice remains pure and unpolluted in order to maintain 
public confidence in the functioning of the tribunals and 
courts subordinate to the High Court.’
5.2	 Similarly, in State vs. Navjot Sandhu2, the powers of the High 
Court under Article 227 came to be explained by this Court 
observing that the powers available to the High Court under 
Article 227 of the Constitution are not meant for and not to be 
exercised just for the purpose of correcting errors. It was held: 
‘It is settled law that this power of judicial 
superintendence, under Article 227, must be 
exercised sparingly and only to keep subordinate 
courts and tribunals within the bounds of their authority 
and not to correct mere errors. Further, where the 
statute bans the exercise of revisional powers it would 
require very exceptional circumstances to warrant 
interference under Article 227 of the Constitution of 
India since the power of superintendence was not 
meant to circumvent statutory law. It is settled law 
that the jurisdiction under Article 227 could not be 
exercised “as the cloak of an appeal in disguise.’
(Para 28)
5.3	 In A. Venkateshubbiah Naidu vs. S. Chellappan3, this Court 
held that ‘though no hurdle can be put against the exercise of the 
constitutional powers of the High Court, it is a well-recognised 
principle which gained judicial recognition that the High Court 
should direct the party to avail himself of such remedies before 
he resorts to a constitutional remedy.’
2	
(2003) 6 SCC 641
3	
(2000) 7 SCC 695

566
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
5.4	 In Rajendra Diwan vs. Pradeep Kumar Ranibala and Anr.4, 
this Court reiterated that the supervisory power under Article 
227 of the Constitution available to the High Court is not for a 
routine exercise, it is meant to keep the courts and tribunals 
within the bounds of their jurisdiction or where grave miscarriage 
of justice has occurred or there is a flagrant violation of law. 
What was stated was that the jurisdiction under Article 227 
cannot be exercised ‘in the cloak of an appeal in disguise’, it 
cannot be converted into an alternative appellate forum.
5.5	 In K.Valarmathi and Ors. vs. Kumaresan5, this Court reiterated 
the same principles for exercising the powers under Article 227 
of the Constitution by the High Courts as under, 
‘Essence of the power under Article 227 being 
supervisory, it cannot be invoked to usurp the 
original jurisdiction of the court which it seeks to 
supervise. Nor can it be invoked to supplant a 
statutory legal remedy under the Civil Procedure 
Code, 1908.’
(Para 9)
5.5.1	 It was further observed, which observation may also be 
pertinently reproduced,
‘Civil Procedure Code is a self-contained Code 
and Order VII Rule 11 therein enumerates the 
circumstances in which the trial court may 
reject a plaint. Such rejection amounts to a 
deemed decree which is appealable before 
the High Court under Section 96 of the Code. 
This statutory scheme cannot be upended by 
invoking supervisory jurisdiction of the High 
Court under Article 227 to entertain a prayer 
for rejection of plaint.’
(Para 10)
4	
(2019) 20 SCC 143
5	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 985

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
567
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
5.6	 In Virudhunagar Hindu Nadargal Dharma Paribalana Sabai 
and Others vs. Tuticorin Educational Society and Others6, 
the appellants therein had filed a suit for declaration and 
permanent injunction. In the said suit proceedings, the trial 
court passed order granting an injunction. Respondent No. 5 
in the suit called in question the order of granting injunction 
by filing a regular appeal under Order XLIII Rule 1(r) of the 
Civil Procedure Code, 1908. But the Defendant Nos. 1 and 
6 challenged the said order of injunction not by filing regular 
appeal but by invoking the powers of the High Court under 
Article 227 of the Constitution. The High Court allowed the 
said civil revision petition and set aside the order of injunction 
granted by the trial court.
5.6.1	 The exercise of supervisory powers under Article 227 
of the Constitution by the High Court to challenge the 
injunction order was strongly disapproved by this court, 
observing that the High Court ought to have seen that 
when remedy of appeal under Section 104 read with 
Order XLIII Rule 1(r), CPC, was directly available, 
Defendant Nos.1 and 6-Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 before 
this Court ought to have taken recourse to the same.
5.6.2	 In Virudhunagar (supra), by categorizing the cases 
where the remedy is available under the provisions of 
the Civil Procedure Code and the cases where such 
remedial provisions exist under special statutes, this 
Court emphasised that in cases falling under the first 
category, where there is availability of remedy in terms of 
the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code, the existence 
of such remedy has to be treated as almost a complete 
bar against applying powers under Article 227 of the 
Constitution in that regard. 
5.6.3	 The Court observed thus,
‘…courts should always bear in mind a distinction 
between (i) cases where such alternative 
remedy is available before civil courts in terms 
6	
(2019) 9 SCC 538

568
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the provisions of Civil Procedure Code, and 
(ii) cases where such alternative remedy is 
available under special enactments and/or 
statutory rules and the fora provided therein 
happen to be quasi-judicial authorities and 
tribunals. In respect of cases falling under the 
first category, which may involve suits and other 
proceedings before civil courts, the availability of 
an appellate remedy in terms of the provisions of 
CPC, may have to be construed as a near total 
bar. Otherwise, there is a danger that someone 
may challenge in a revision under Article 227, 
even a decree passed in a suit, on the same 
grounds on which Respondents 1 and 2 invoked 
the jurisdiction of the High Court.’
(Para 12)
5.7	 The statement of law observed by a Three-Judge Bench of this 
Court in Radhey Shyam vs. Chhabi Nath7, while overruling 
the earlier decision in Surya Dev Rai vs. Ram Chander Rai8, 
was recollected, that ‘orders of civil courts stand on a different 
footing from the orders of authorities or tribunals or courts other 
than judicial/ Civil Court’, stating further as under,
‘Therefore wherever the proceedings are under 
the Civil Procedure Code and the forum is the civil 
court, the availability of a remedy under the CPC, 
will deter the High Court, not merely as a measure 
of self-imposed restriction, but as a matter of 
discipline and prudence, from exercising its power 
of superintendence under the Constitution. Hence, 
the High Court ought not to have entertained the 
revision under Article 227 especially in a case where 
a specific remedy of appeal is provided under the 
Civil Procedure Code itself.’
(Para 13)
7	
(2015) 5 SCC 423
8	
(2003) 6 SCC 675

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
569
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
6.	
In the case on hand, the High Court has exercised its supervisory 
powers under Article 227 of the Constitution and proceeded to set 
aside the plaint. The invocation of such powers are sought to be 
justified by the defendants – respondents by stating that the amplitude 
of such power is vast and pervasive, which was duly exercised by 
the High Court to strike off the erroneous plaint. A shelter is also 
taken from the provision of Order VI Rule 16, CPC to submit that it 
is a provision under which frivolous or vexatious proceedings could 
be struck off, reading it with powers of superintendence under Article 
227 of the Constitution. 
6.1	 For easy reference, the provision of Order VI Rule 16 CPC is 
extracted hereinbelow, 
‘16. Striking out pleadings.
The Court may at any stage of the proceedings 
order to be struck out or amended any matter 
in any pleading- (a) which may be unnecessary, 
scandalous, frivolous or vexatious, or (b) which 
may tend to prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair 
trail of the suit, or (c) which is otherwise an abuse 
of the process of the Court.’
6.1.1	 The bare perusal of the aforementioned provision 
mandates procedural defects whereby the courts can 
exercise their discretionary power to strike out any matter 
in any pleading. Such discretion could be exercised 
cautiously and only when the parameter stipulated 
under the said provision are apparent, such as, when 
the matter in the pleading is unnecessary, scandalous, 
frivolous or vexatious or it is of such a nature it tends 
to prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trial of the suit 
or it is otherwise an abuse of the process of the court. 
6.2	 Now, there is a specific provision under the CPC in the nature 
of Order VII Rule 11, which deals with the rejection of the plaint, 
which mentions specific grounds on which the court may reject 
the plaint. The said provision is reproduced herein,
‘11. Rejection of plaint.
The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases:
(a)	 where it does not disclose a cause of action;

570
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(b)	 where the relief claimed is undervalued, and 
the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to 
correct the valuation within a time to be fixed 
by the Court, fails to do so;
(c)	 where the relief claimed is properly valued, but 
the plaint is returned upon paper insufficiently 
stamped, and the plaintiff, on being required 
by the Court to supply the requisite stamp-
paper within a time to be fixed by the Court, 
fails to do so;
(d)	 where the suit appears from the statement in 
the plaint to be barred by any law;’
(e)	 where it is not filed in duplicate;
(f)	
where the plaintiff fails to comply with the 
provisions of rule 9.
…..’
6.2.1	 The provision says that the plaint shall be rejected 
in the following cases, firstly, if it does not disclose a 
cause of action. Now, the cause of action is a bundle of 
facts. Whether cause of action exists for the purpose of 
validly instituting the suit or not would necessarily require 
a factual inquiry. The second ground is that the relief 
claimed when undervalued and the plaintiff, on being 
required by the Court to correct the valuation and pay 
the deficit court fee within the time which may be fixed 
by the Court, fails to do so. The third ground mentioned 
for rejection of the plaint is similar with regard to the 
plaint which is insufficiently stamped and the plaintiff 
has failed to supply the requisite stamp paper within 
the time fixed by the court. 
6.2.2	 The fourth ground is about the suit appearing from the 
statement in the plaint to be barred by any law. Though 
this may be a legal consideration, the attendant facts 
would become relevant and the issue may not always 
be finally adjudged without application of facts. The fifth 
ground is that the plaint is not filed in duplicate. This 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
571
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
is curable defect and a procedural aspect. The sixth 
ground is where the plaintiff fails to comply with the 
provisions of Rule 9, which is also not to be immune 
from consideration of facts of the case.
6.2.3	 As far as the ground of correction of valuation for 
supplying of the stamp paper is concerned, the proviso 
mentions that time may be extended by the Court, for 
the reasons to be recorded, if the court is satisfied that 
the plaintiff was prevented by any cause of exceptional 
nature. There is no gainsaying that there will have to be 
factual inquiry in the process of determination for rejection 
of plaint and for the satisfaction to be arrived at by the 
Court with regard to the extension of time, which the 
court may grant. Therefore, it would be entirely proper to 
conclude that when the grounds for rejection of the plaint, 
provided in statutory provision, require the consideration 
of the facts of the case, such issue should not be gone into 
by exercising supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 
of the Constitution, which even otherwise is supposed 
to be exercised by the Court sparingly and not just for 
the purpose of correcting purported errors. In any view, 
the overriding criteria in law is that the supervisory 
jurisdiction cannot be applied to substitute the remedy 
available specifically in the CPC itself.
6.3	 While the principal issue addressed in the present appeal is 
about the principle whether the High Court could have exercised 
its supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution to 
strike off the plaint, even though a specific provision for rejection 
of the plaint under Order VII Rule 11, CPC was available to 
the defendants to be taken recourse to, it is also to be noted 
additionally that the dispute in the suit was essentially a title 
dispute between the parties. Secondly, the defence of the 
defendants was that the suit was fraudulent and based on false 
documents. The High Court accepted the said contentions and 
struck down the plaint vide its powers under Article 227 of the 
Constitution. 
6.3.1	 In Shalini Shyam Shetty1, this Court in Paragraph 64 of 
the judgment has flagged the growing tendency among 

572
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the High Courts to entertain writ petitions in cases of 
property disputes, partition suits, matters relating to the 
execution of decrees, landlord-tenant disputes, money 
decrees and in respect of such other various cases 
and has disapproved the same and held that the High 
Courts could not in a routine manner entertain petitions 
under Article 227.
6.3.2	 It has to be acknowledged that almost all civil suits would 
involve disputed question of facts. The averment in plaint 
quite often than not, raise controversy which, in ultimate 
analysis, is to be addressed and adjudicated by leading 
evidence. As these are the disputes of civil nature to 
be dealt with by the civil court, and the invocation of 
Constitutional powers thereover in a routine manner may 
not be necessary nor is advisable. This proposition, in its 
analogousness, would justify holding that powers under 
Article 227 of the Constitution would not be available 
to be exercised where there is an alternative remedy. 
6.4	 For the very above reasoning, the reliance placed on the 
provision of Order VI Rule 16, CPC to support the impugned 
order and to justify the exercise of powers under Article 227 of 
the Constitution for striking out the plaint, is misconceived in 
law. Order VI Rule 16, CPC deals with the question of striking 
out pleadings, to provide that the Court may, at any stage of the 
proceedings, order to be struck out or amended in any matter 
in any pleading which is unnecessary, scandalous, frivolous, or 
vexatious or which may tend to prejudice or embarrass the fair 
trial of the suit or which is otherwise an abuse of the process 
of Court. 
6.4.1	 Evidently, this provision deals with the striking out of 
a part or a section of the pleading which suffers from 
any of the kinds mentioned in the provision, such 
as unnecessary, scandalous, frivolous, vexatious, 
prejudicial, embarrassing or delaying the fair trial or abuse 
of the process of law. It would be stretching beyond the 
logic of law to interpret and imply that Order VI Rule 16 
can be utilized and employed for striking down the entire 
plaint. Striking down the plaint or rejection of plaint on 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
573
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
the legal grounds available in Order VII Rule 11, CPC 
is entirely different than striking out the infirm or abusive 
pleadings. Under the guise of invoking Order VI Rule 16, 
CPC, therefore, justification for using the powers under 
Article 227 of the Constitution cannot be extended.
7.	
When the powers under Article 227 of the Constitution are of 
supervisory nature and when the aforestated settled dictum of law 
is that the High Court does not act as a court of appeal or a court 
of error, it would logically follow that the powers under Article 227 
would not be exercised when the non-exercise of such powers does 
not result into miscarriage of justice or deprivation of remedy in law 
to a party. 
7.1	 It is to be conceived as one of the prohibited area for exercising 
Article 227 powers where, in respect of the grievance for which 
party has remedy in law, these powers are surely to be invoked. 
The principle is therefore to be emphasized that the exercise 
of supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution 
has to be treated as an exceptional resort when an alternative 
efficacious civil remedy by way of appeal or revision or any other, 
like Order VII Rule 11, CPC in the present case, is available to 
the party for the redressal of the grievance.
7.2	 The proposition that the availability of alternative remedy 
shall be legitimately construed to displace the exercise of 
Constitutional jurisdiction by the High Court, is true not only 
for the purpose of exercising powers under Article 226 of the 
Constitution but also for the purpose of invoking Article 227 
of the Constitution. 
7.3	 In the garb of exercising supervisory jurisdiction under Article 
227 of the Constitution, the High Court is not expected to 
engulf the specific statutory remedy or provision in law and, 
thus, become a supervisor over the court below or the tribunal, 
as the case may be. It would be a legally wise exercise of 
discretion for the High Court to adopt and adhere to such self-
imposed discipline and to insist that the aggrieved party should 
take recourse to such alternative remedy or statutory provision 
available in law, especially, for the case falling in category 
indicated in Virudhunagar6 (supra) where remedy available 

574
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in the CPC for the cases falling under category/other law also, 
where such specific statutory remedy is available, the dictum 
laid down herein is true to grant extent.
7.4	 As stated above, embargo in this regard would have to be 
construed as near total when provision is available in CPC. It 
is held, therefore, that once the specific provision under Order 
VII Rule 11 of the CPC, is available, the High Court cannot 
exercise powers under Article 227 to reject or strike off the plaint. 
For such relief, the specific provision under Order VII Rule 11, 
CPC, will have to be resorted to, on the grounds mentioned in 
the said provision.
8.	
In adopting such approach, the High Court would be giving due regard 
to the legislative intent. When the legislature has enacted specific 
remedial provision to be taken recourse to by the person aggrieved 
to challenge the orders and decisions of the court to seek redress 
in law accordingly that remedy alone will have to be sought for. 
9.	
From the aforesaid discussion, it would logically follow that the High 
Court would not only discourage but desist from exercising jurisdiction 
under Article 227 of the Constitution in respect of a challenge for 
which a separate, distinct, and specific remedy or statutory provision 
is available under the statute concerned. Availability of an alternative 
civil remedy and/or under the CPC shall be treated as complete and 
near total bar on the High Court to venture to invoke and exercise its 
power available under Article 227 of the Constitution, except where 
exercise of supervisory jurisdiction becomes absolutely necessary. 
10.	 For all the aforesaid reasons and discussions, this court is of the view 
that High Court committed a manifest error in exercising its powers 
under Article 227 of the Constitution to strike down the plaint. It ought 
to have asked the defendant to take recourse to, in accordance with 
law, when specific provisions available in the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 in the nature of Order VII Rule 11. The impugned judgment 
and order of the High Court, therefore, deserves to be set aside. 
10.1	 As a result, the judgment and order dated 03.06.2025 passed 
by the High Court of Madras in CRP No. 3197 of 2024 and 
CMP No. 17106 of 2024 striking off the plaint of Original Suit 
No. 93 of 2020 before the Court of District Munsif, Tambaram, 
is hereby set aside.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
575
P. Suresh v. D.Kalaivani & Ors.
11.	 The appeal is allowed. Consequently, the suit is restored to its 
original file and parties are directed to appear before the trial court 
for further proceedings on 16.02.2026 without awaiting further notice. 
Liberty is reserved for the defendants to file application under Order 
VII Rule 11, CPC, to be considered strictly in accordance with law. 
There shall be no costs. 
In view of the disposal of the main appeal, all interlocutory applications, 
as may be pending, stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
