[2026] 2 S.C.R. 481 : 2026 INSC 120
Pramod Kumar & Ors.
v.
State of Uttar Pradesh Ors.
(Criminal Appeal No. 687 of 2026)
04 February 2026
[Rajesh Bindal and Vijay Bishnoi,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether after submitting a final report u/s.173(2) of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) (s.193(3) of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (BNSS)), the police/investigating 
agency can conduct further investigation u/s.173(8) of CrPC 
(s.193(9) of BNSS) without obtaining the leave of the Magistrate/
Court concerned.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.173(2), s.173(8) – Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 – s.193(3), s.193(9) – An FIR 
was registered against seven accused persons including 
appellants for the offence punishable u/ss.376D, 352, 504, 506 
respectively of the IPC – After completion of the investigation, 
the Investigating Officer submitted the Final Report (closure 
report) stating that no offence was made out against the 
accused persons, including the appellants herein   – The 
Court of First Additional Civil Judge, (J.D.)/Judicial Magistrate 
after considering the Closure Report, accepted the same – 
After few years, a complaint was filed before NHRC alleging 
several deficiencies in the investigation conducted by police 
officials – The Under Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh, 
forwarded the matter to CBCID directing investigation and 
recommended further investigation u/s.173(8) of CrPC – The 
Superintendent of Police, directed IO to make available the 
special report relating to the further investigation – Notice 
issued to accused persons – Writ Petition – The High Court, 
inter-alia, directed continuation of investigation and dismissed 
the petition – Correctness:
Held: In light of the legal position as settled by this Court through 
the various judgments, it is safe to say that the power to direct 
* Author

482
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
further investigation in a case rests solely at the discretion of the 
Magistrate/Court concerned – In the event, the police/ investigating 
agency is of the opinion that further investigation is necessary 
in any particular case to cull out complete facts and truth in the 
case, it is binding upon them to file an appropriate application 
before the Magistrate/Court, without directing an order for further 
investigation by themselves – Once such an application is filed 
by the investigating agency, the Magistrate/Court would apply 
its judicial mind, in light of the facts and circumstances of the 
particular case and the reasons demonstrated by the investigating 
agency, in order to exercise its discretion for exercise of its power 
to decide whether or not further investigation is to be ordered 
under the purview of s.173(8) of CrPC – Thus, it is amply clear 
that the Superintendent of Police acted in complete defiance of the 
procedure laid down under the law while passing orders directing 
further investigation without seeking leave of the Court – The 
impugned judgment passed by the High Court is set aside – In 
addition to that, the communication dated 06.06.2019 and order 
dated 26.04.2021 passed directing further investigation, are also 
quashed and set aside. [Paras 33, 36, 38]
Case Law Cited
Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali alias Deepak and Ors. [2012] 13 SCR 
1005 : (2013) 5 SCC 762; Peethambaran v. State of Kerala & Anr. 
[2023] 4 SCR 1144 : (2024) 16 SCC 65 – relied on.
Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana and Ors. [2016] 1 SCR 194 : 
(2016) 4 SCC 160 – held inapplicable.
Bhagwant Singh v. Commr. of Police [1985] 3 SCR 942 : (1985) 
2 SCC 537; Vinubhai Haribhai Malviya and Others v. State of 
Gujarat and Another [2019] SCR 936 : (2019) 17 SCC 1; Devendra 
Nath Singh v. State of Bihar [2023] 15 SCR 692 : (2023) 1 SCC 
48 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023.
List of Keywords
Investigation; Further investigation; Investigating agency; Section 
173(8) of CrPC; Section 193(9) of BNSS; Final Report; Closure 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
483
Pramod Kumar & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh Ors.
Report; Discretion of the Magistrate/Court; Superintendent of Police; 
Direct fresh/de novo/reinvestigation; Transfer of the investigation; 
Court of law; Judicial mind; Power to direct further investigation; 
Leave of Court/Magistrate.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
687 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.11.2023 of the High 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in CRLMWP 
No. 4000 of 2022
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Divyesh Pratap Singh, Ms. Shivangi Singh, Amit Sangwan, Bharat 
Mishra, Tiwari Prashantipriya Awadesh, Suraj Prakash Singh.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Apoorva Agrawal, A.A.G., Abhisehk Kumar Singh, Sarvesh Singh 
Baghel.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Vijay Bishnoi, J.
Leave Granted.
2.	
This appeal has been preferred by the Appellants challenging the 
order dated 20.11.2023 (hereinafter referred to as “impugned 
judgment”) passed in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 4000 of 
2022 by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench 
(hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”). The writ petition filed 
by the Appellants was dismissed by the High Court, wherein the 
High Court refused to quash a communication dated 06.06.2019, 
issued by Under Secretary to the State of U.P. to the Director, Crime 
Branch, Crime Investigation Department, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 
(Respondent No. 1 herein) and order dated 26.04.2021 passed by the 
Superintendent of Police, Agra, Crime Branch, AAD, Uttar Pradesh 
Lucknow (Respondent No. 4 herein). 

484
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
3.	
The sole question arises for our consideration in the present appeal 
is whether after submitting a final report under Section 173(2) of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short “Cr.P.C.”) (also refer to 
Section 193(3) of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (for 
short “BNSS”), the police/investigating agency can conduct further 
investigation under Section 173(8) of CrPC (also refer to Section 
193(9) of BNSS) without obtaining the leave of the Magistrate/ Court 
concerned? 
FACTUAL MATRIX
4.	
A fascicule of facts pertinent for the disposal of this appeal are that, 
on 19.11.2013, an FIR bearing Case Crime No. 70/2013 (hereinafter 
referred to as “the FIR”) was registered against seven accused 
persons including the Appellants herein by Saroj Kumar - Respondent 
No. 6 (hereinafter referred to as “the original complainant”) for the 
offence punishable under Sections 376D, 352, 504, 506 respectively 
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “IPC”) at Mahila Police 
Station, Sub-district Sadar, District Firozabad. 
5.	
During investigation, owing to multiple applications moved by the 
original complainant alleging danger to his life and his family members’ 
lives, the investigation was initially transferred from the Mahila Police 
Station to the Crime Branch, Firozabad, and subsequently to the 
Crime Branch, Mathura.
6.	
After completion of the investigation, the Investigating Officer 
submitted the Final Report No.17/14 dated 30.05.2014 (hereinafter 
referred to as “the Closure Report”), stating that no offence was 
made out against the accused persons, including the Appellants 
herein, in light of the contradictions between the statements of the 
original complainant under Section 161 and 164 of the CrPC. The 
relevant extract of the closure report is reproduced herein under: 
“On the basis of information of the informant, the aforesaid 
case was registered and investigation was undertaken. 
There is contradiction between the statements U/s. 161 
and 164 Cr.P.C. of the informant. There is enmity/litigation 
pending between the informant and the accused persons. 
The statements of the informant are not supported by 
other evidences. Hence, the offence is not confirmed. In 
absence of evidences, it is impossible to file challan against 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
485
Pramod Kumar & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh Ors.
the accused persons before the Court. Hence, the case 
is closed by FR. Kindly approve it”
7.	
After receiving the Closure Report, the Court of First Additional Civil 
Judge, (J.D.)/Judicial Magistrate, Firozabad, issued several notices 
to the original complainant. However, despite the service of notices, 
neither he appeared before the Court, nor he filed any protest petition 
against the Closure Report. The Court of First Additional Civil Judge, 
(J.D.)/Judicial Magistrate, Firozabad​, after considering the Closure 
Report, has accepted the same vide order dated 14.09.2015, noting 
that the material on record did not support the prosecution’s case. 
The relevant extract of the order is reproduced herein under: 
“The case file was presented today. Notice has been sent 
to the informant several times. Despite the notice has been 
duly served to the informant several times, he had not 
filed any objection/protest petition against the final report. 
It is clear from the case diary and police documents and 
evidences available in the file that the statements u/s 161 
CrPC and statements u/s 164 CrPC of the informant and 
the person with whom the victim had gone to the bridge 
on a motorcycle to search for her brothers, it has been 
confirmed from her statements/affidavit, that neither the 
victim met that day nor she was taken to the bridge on 
a motorcycle and none of the statements of witnesses 
recorded by the IO have confirmed the incident. Even 
perusal of the medical report does not confirm any kind 
of external or internal injury and the statements made by 
the victim are also not confirmed by the medical report. 
Thus, according to the medical report, no clear inference 
can be made that the victim was raped.
It is also clear from the perusal of the file that the informant 
had requested for the investigation of the said case, apart 
by the local police, shall be conducted by the Crime Branch, 
on which the case was investigated by the Crime Branch, 
Mathura. The investigation was carried out by several 
Investigating Officers of Crime Branch, Mathura and after 
the investigation, the mobile phones of the accused were 
matched through cell track by Mr. Narendra Singh, and the 
location of any of the accused persons was not found at the 
spot at the time of the incident, which has been recorded 

486
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in the case diary by the IO and any of the witness had 
not confirmed the statement of the victim, on the basis 
of which the final report in the case No. 17/14 dated 30-
5-14 has been submitted by the IO on 30.05.2014 which 
prima facie appears to be legal. Therefore, in compliance 
of Hon’ble High Court’s circular no. 31/2012 Admin, G. 
II, Allahabad dated 11-12-2012 and Hon’ble High Court 
Allahabad’s criminal miscellaneous petition no. 2520/2012 
Pradeep Kumar Srivastava vs. State of UP and others u/s 
482/378/507 order passed in S.P. No. dated 27-7-2012 
and circular letter no. of Honorable High Court Allahabad 
no. 10435 date 03.09.2014 and letter no. 420/2015 dated 
17.01.2015, the final report no. 17/14 is accepted. It should 
be attached in the file.”
8.	
Subsequently, after a span of about 3 years, the original complainant 
filed a Criminal Revision Petition (later registered as Criminal 
Miscellaneous Case No. 440 of 2017) before the Court of District 
and Sessions Judge, Firozabad, for setting aside the aforesaid 
order dated 14.09.2015, wherein the Closure Report was accepted. 
The said case is presently pending before the Court of District and 
Sessions Judge, Firozabad. 
9.	
Thereafter, one Dr. Ashu Kumar filed a complaint before the National 
Human Rights Commission (hereinafter referred to as “NHRC”) 
alleging several deficiencies in the investigation conducted by police 
officials. The Assistant Registrar (Law) of the NHRC after considering 
the said complaint, passed an order dated 06.03.2019, citing several 
discrepancies in the investigation done by investigating agency and, 
consequently, directed the Director General of Police, Uttar Pradesh 
(hereinafter referred to as “the DGP”) to conduct a fact finding enquiry 
into the conduct of officials of Police Station Ekka, Police Station 
Narkhi, by an officer not below the rank of the Superintendent of 
Police and submit a report regarding the same within a period of 6 
weeks. The NHRC further directed the Chief Secretary to pay an 
amount of Rs. 2 lakhs to the prosecutrix and Rs. 1 lakh each to 
the original complainant as well as the father of the prosecutrix and 
submit a compliance report within 6 weeks.
10.	 In compliance thereof, the Under Secretary, Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, forwarded a communication dated 06.06.2019 to the 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
487
Pramod Kumar & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh Ors.
Director, Crime Branch, Crime Investigation Department, Uttar 
Pradesh (hereinafter referred to as “CBCID”), informing that in 
pursuance to the directions of the NHRC, it had been decided that 
the matter should be investigated by CBCID, and further directing it 
to complete the investigation within a period of 6 weeks and submit 
a final progress report.
11.	 In view of the aforesaid, the Under Secretary, Government of Uttar 
Pradesh vide letter dated 12.02.2021, informed the NHRC that an 
investigation pursuant to the conduct of the officers involved in 
the present case is underway. Further, it was also informed that in 
order to reveal the truth of the accusations involved in the case, it is 
recommended that further investigation under Section 173(8) should 
be conducted in FIR No. 70/2013. 
12.	 With the approval of the Director General of Police, CBCID, an 
Inspector of CBCID (hereinafter referred to as “IO”) was nominated 
for carrying out further investigation of the present case under 
Section 173(8) of the CrPC and pursuantly, the newly appointed 
IO filed an application dated 22.04.2021 before the Court of First 
Additional Civil Judge (J.D.)/Judicial Magistrate, Firozabad, seeking 
permission to conduct further investigation in the instant case under 
Section 173(8) of the CrPC.
13.	 Thereafter, vide communication dated 26.04.2021, the Superintendent 
of Police, Agra informed the Additional Superintendent of Police/
Divisional Officer, Crime Branch, A.A.D., Agra, about the nomination 
of the IO in the present case and also directed him to make available 
the special report relating to the further investigation (in 10 days), 
the draft of the plan (in 20 days) and the monthly progress report in 
the prescribed formats to the headquarters on time and complete 
the investigation as soon as possible and send the final progress 
to the headquarters. 
14.	 In furtherance of the said investigation, the IO sent a notice to the 
accused persons, including the Appellants, for the collection of their 
blood samples to conduct a DNA test and their blood samples were 
collected. 
15.	 Consequently, the Appellants filed Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 
4000 of 2022 before the High Court challenging the communication 
dated 06.06.2019 and order dated 26.04.2021. 

488
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
16.	 The High Court, vide order dated 23.06.2022, initially granted interim 
protection from arrest to the Appellants. However, in the same order, 
it was directed that the investigation shall continue and that the 
Appellants shall cooperate with the investigation. 
17.	 During the pendency of the Writ Petition, the Director, Forensic 
Science Laboratory, State of Uttar Pradesh, submitted the DNA 
Test Report dated 21.09.2022 stating that the accused persons, 
including the Appellants, were not the biological father of the fetus 
of the prosecutrix. 
18.	 Later, the High Court vide the impugned judgment, observed that 
the allegations of rape were made against several accused, and 
the prosecutrix also filed a protest petition against the final report 
submitted by the Investigating Officer. The DNA sample of the 
aborted fetus (resulting from the pregnancy from the alleged rape) 
was also preserved, and the Investigating Officer had written to the 
Court praying that a DNA test be carried out to ascertain who was 
involved, amongst the several accused, in the commission of rape. 
The High Court, thus, held that it found no good grounds to entertain 
the petition and dismissed the same.
19.	 Aggrieved, the Appellants preferred the instant appeal before this 
Court. During the pendency of the appeal, this Court vide order 
dated 16.01.2024, issued notice and stayed the operation of the 
communication dated 06.06.2019 and order dated 26.04.2021, and 
also the investigation in the present case. The relevant portion of 
order dated 16.01.2024 of this Court is reproduced herein under: 
“Applications seeking exemption from filing C/C of the 
impugned judgment and exemption from filing O.T. are 
allowed. 
Issue notice. 
In the meantime, operation and effect of the communications 
dated 06.6.2019 and 26.4.2021 directing investigation in 
Case Crime no.70/13 U/s. 376D, 352, 504, 506 IPC 
registered at PS Mahila Police Station, District Firozabad 
shall remain stayed.”
20.	 Pursuant to the order dated 16.01.2024, notices were issued and were 
served to all Respondents except Respondent No. 7. Respondent 
No. 6 did not appear before this Court even after notice was served 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
489
Pramod Kumar & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh Ors.
to him on 30.01.2024. Further, notice could not be served upon 
Respondent No. 7 and therefore, a report from the Trial Court was 
called upon wherein it was mentioned that the notice was unserved 
with remarks “no such person found”. During the pendency of the 
appeal, the appellant submitted that an application would be filed to 
delete the name of Respondent No. 7 from the array of parties. The 
relevant portion of the order dated 30.09.2024 is reproduced below:
“Service is complete on respondent nos. 1 to 6 but none 
has entered appearance. 
As per report of concerned Trial Court, notice could not be 
served on respondent no.7 due to remarks “no such person 
found”. However, ld. Counsel for the petitioner submits that 
an application for deletion of the name of respondent no.7 
from the array of parties will be filed. Be filed within one 
week. If filed, process as per rules. However, if application 
is not filed, list again on 06.01.2025.”
21.	 Subsequently, vide order dated 28.08.2025, the name of Respondent 
No. 7 was deleted from the appeal at the risk of appellants. The 
extract of the said order is reproduced herein under:
“Application for deleting the name of respondent no. 7 is 
allowed at the risk of the petitioners.”
CONTENTION OF THE PARTIES
22.	 We have heard Mr. Divyesh Pratap Singh, learned counsel for the 
Appellants and Mr. Apoorva Agarwal, learned Additional Advocate 
General for the respondent State. 
23.	 Mr. Divyesh Pratap Singh, submitted that the Superintendent of 
Police, Agra, on recommendation of the State of Uttar Pradesh, was 
directed for further investigation under Section 173(8) of CrPC without 
obtaining prior permission from the competent Court, even though 
a closure report had already been accepted. The Learned counsel 
for the Appellants contended that once the final report is accepted, 
only the criminal Court has the power to order further investigation 
and such power cannot be exercised by the police or any executive 
authority. Further, the so-called “further investigation” is in fact an 
impermissible de-novo or fresh investigation, as it was ordered 
after about seven years without any new or additional material and 

490
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
was initiated from the very first stage, including demands for DNA 
samples after several years, which amounts to filling up lacunae in 
the prosecution case. 
24.	 The learned counsel for the Appellants further contended that the 
final report dated 30.05.2014 was filed after a thorough investigation 
and was accepted by the Court on 14.09.2015, after due notice to the 
original informant, who did not file any objection or a protest petition. 
It was also contended that the DNA report dated 21.09.2022 clearly 
concluded that the accused persons, including the Appellants, are 
not the biological fathers of the prosecutrix’s aborted foetus, which 
debunks the very genesis of the case and directly contradicts the 
allegations of the alleged incident. The learned counsel placed reliance 
on the judgment passed by this Court in Vinay Tyagi versus Irshad 
Ali alias Deepak and Ors. [reported in (2013) 5 SCC 762], wherein 
it was held that it is the part of procedure of the investigating agency 
to seek leave of the Court before conducting “further investigation”. 
25.	 On the contrary, learned AAG argued that there is no bar under 
Section 173(8) of CrPC against conducting further investigation. It 
was argued that “further investigation” is merely continuation of the 
earlier investigation, and there is nothing in the CrPC to suggest 
that the Court is obliged to hear the accused while considering an 
application for further investigation under Section 173(8) of CrPC. 
The learned AAG also placed reliance upon the judgment of this 
Court in Dharam Pal versus State of Haryana and Ors. [reported 
in (2016) 4 SCC 160], wherein this Court held that the Police Officer 
has unrestricted power under Section 173(8) of CrPC to conduct 
further investigation. 
26.	 We have heard both the parties and perused the material available 
on record. 
ANALYSIS 
27.	 The power of the investigating agency to order further investigation 
in any criminal case is derived from the aegis of Section 173(8) of 
CrPC (also refer to Section 193(9) BNSS), which is reproduced as 
follows:
“(8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude 
further investigation in respect of an offence after a 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
491
Pramod Kumar & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh Ors.
report under sub-section (2) has been forwarded to the 
Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer 
in charge of the police station obtains further evidence, 
oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a 
further report or reports regarding such evidence in the 
form prescribed; and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to 
(6) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report 
or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded 
under sub-section (2).”
28.	 Thus, the powers of the investigating agency for further investigation 
are not in dispute herein. However, what catches attention here 
and which is also the crux of the controversy in the present case, 
is which authority can pass an order directing investigating agency 
to undertake further investigation under Section 173(8) of CrPC. 
29.	 The issue regarding the procedure to be followed for directing further 
investigation in a case has been dealt by this Court in the case 
of Vinay Tyagi (supra), wherein this Court while dealing with the 
contours of Section 173(8) of CrPC relating to further investigation, 
propounded that the police ought to follow the procedure of seeking 
permission from the Court to conduct “further investigation” and file 
a supplementary chargesheet. The relevant paragraphs from the 
judgment are reproduced as under: 
“40. Having analysed the provisions of the Code and 
the various judgments as aforeindicated, we would state 
the following conclusions in regard to the powers of a 
Magistrate in terms of Section 173(2) read with Section 
173(8) and Section 156(3) of the Code:
40.1. The Magistrate has no power to direct “reinvestigation” 
or “fresh investigation” (de novo) in the case initiated on 
the basis of a police report.
40.2. A Magistrate has the power to direct “further 
investigation” after filing of a police report in terms of 
Section 173(6) of the Code.
40.3. The view expressed in Sub-para 40.2 above is in 
conformity with the principle of law stated in Bhagwant 
Singh case by a three-Judge Bench and thus in conformity 
with the doctrine of precedent.

492
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
40.4. Neither the scheme of the Code nor any specific 
provision therein bars exercise of such jurisdiction by the 
Magistrate. The language of Section 173(2) cannot be 
construed so restrictively as to deprive the Magistrate of 
such powers particularly in face of the provisions of Section 
156(3) and the language of Section 173(8) itself. In fact, 
such power would have to be read into the language of 
Section 173(8).
40.5. The Code is a procedural document, thus, it must 
receive a construction which would advance the cause 
of justice and legislative object sought to be achieved. 
It does not stand to reason that the legislature provided 
power of further investigation to the police even after filing 
a report, but intended to curtail the power of the court to 
the extent that even where the facts of the case and the 
ends of justice demand, the court can still not direct the 
investigating agency to conduct further investigation which 
it could do on its own.
40.6. It has been a procedure of propriety that the police 
has to seek permission of the court to continue “further 
investigation” and file supplementary charge-sheet. This 
approach has been approved by this Court in a number 
of judgments. This as such would support the view that 
we are taking in the present case……” 
(Emphasis Supplied)
30.	 In this very judgment, this Court while noting that although there is 
no explicit mandate under Section 173(8) of CrPC to seek leave of 
the Court before conducting further investigation, nevertheless, over 
the time, a practice has been developed to seek permission of the 
Court. Therefore, the practice of seeking the leave of the Court will 
have to be read into the provisions of Section 173(8) of CrPC, and 
it is essentially a prerequisite for directing further investigation. This 
Court therein held as follows:
“49. Now, we may examine another significant aspect 
which is how the provisions of Section 173(8) have been 
understood and applied by the courts and investigating 
agencies. It is true that though there is no specific 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
493
Pramod Kumar & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh Ors.
requirement in the provisions of Section 173(8) of the Code 
to conduct “further investigation” or file supplementary 
report with the leave of the court, the investigating agencies 
have not only understood but also adopted it as a legal 
practice to seek permission of the courts to conduct “further 
investigation” and file “supplementary report” with the leave 
of the court. The courts, in some of the decisions, have 
also taken a similar view. The requirement of seeking prior 
leave of the court to conduct “further investigation” and/
or to file a “supplementary report” will have to be read 
into, and is a necessary implication of the provisions of 
Section 173(8) of the Code. The doctrine of contemporanea 
expositio will fully come to the aid of such interpretation 
as the matters which are understood and implemented for 
a long time, and such practice that is supported by law 
should be accepted as part of the interpretative process.
50. Such a view can be supported from two different 
points of view: firstly, through the doctrine of precedent, 
as aforenoticed, since quite often the courts have taken 
such a view, and, secondly, the investigating agencies 
which have also so understood and applied the principle. 
The matters which are understood and implemented as 
a legal practice and are not opposed to the basic rule of 
law would be good practice and such interpretation would 
be permissible with the aid of doctrine of contemporanea 
expositio. Even otherwise, to seek such leave of the court 
would meet the ends of justice and also provide adequate 
safeguard against a suspect/accused”
(Emphasis Supplied)
31.	 The proposition of the law laid down in the case of Vinay Tyagi 
(supra) has been further affirmed by the three Judge Bench of this 
Court in the case of Vinubhai Haribhai Malviya and Others versus 
State of Gujarat and Another [reported in (2019) 17 SCC 1]. 
32.	 This Court has dealt with a similar situation in the case of 
Peethambaran versus State Of Kerala & Another [reported 
in (2024) 16 SCC 65], wherein the District Police Chief, i.e., 
Superintendent of Police, ordered further investigation. This Court 
therein, while quashing the order passed by the District Police 

494
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Chief, held that the power to order further investigation rests either 
with the Magistrate concerned or a higher court, but not with the 
investigating agency. The relevant paragraphs from the judgment 
are reproduced as follows:
“19. The Chief Police Officer of a district is the 
Superintendent of Police who is an officer of the Indian 
Police Service. Needless to state, an order from the 
District Police Chief is not the same as an order issued by 
the Magistrate concerned. Referring to Vinay Tyagi, this 
Court in Devendra Nath Singh v. State of Bihar noted that 
there is no specific requirement to seek leave of the court 
for further investigation or to file a supplementary report 
but the investigating agencies, have not only understood 
it to be so but have also adopted the same as a legal 
requirement. The doctrine of contemporanea exposito aids 
such an interpretation of matters which have been long 
understood and implemented in a particular manner to be 
accepted into the interpretive process. In other words, the 
requirement of permission for further investigation or to 
file a supplementary report is accepted within law and is 
therefore required to be complied with.
20. In the facts at hand, it is clear that such a permission 
was never taken, granted or ordered. Consequently, FR-
II is without basis. In FR-I it has been stated that in the 
absence of any documents in respect of the financial 
transactions, the instant case may be treated as a false 
case. This, then would necessarily imply that after due 
investigation conducted by a duly authorised person, the 
conclusion is that the ingredients of the section mentioned 
in the FIR have not been met and no case is made out.
XXXX
28. In terms of second question, the above discussion 
makes clear that the District Police Chief, Kottayam could 
not have ordered further investigation, as that power rests 
either with the Magistrate concerned or with a higher court 
and not with an investigating agency.”
(Emphasis Supplied)

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
495
Pramod Kumar & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh Ors.
33.	 In light of the legal position as settled by this Court through the 
above judgments, it is safe to say that the power to direct further 
investigation in a case rests solely at the discretion of the Magistrate/
Court concerned. In the event, the police/ investigating agency is of 
the opinion that further investigation is necessary in any particular 
case to cull out complete facts and truth in the case, it is binding upon 
them to file an appropriate application before the Magistrate/Court, 
without directing an order for further investigation by themselves. 
Once such an application is filed by the investigating agency, the 
Magistrate/Court would apply its judicial mind, in light of the facts and 
circumstances of the particular case and the reasons demonstrated 
by the investigating agency, in order to exercise its discretion for 
exercise of its power to decide whether or not further investigation 
is to be ordered under the purview of Section 173(8) of CrPC. 
34.	 In the present case, the Under Secretary to the State of Uttar Pradesh, 
vide its letter dated 06.06.2019, directed that the investigation in the 
matter would be conducted by the CBCID. The Under Secretary 
also recommended that further investigation under Section 173(8) of 
CrPC be conducted through its letter addressed to the NHRC dated 
12.02.2021. Consequently, the Investigating Officer of the CBCID 
wrote a letter dated 22.04.2021 to the Judicial Magistrate, Firozabad, 
requesting to grant permission to conduct further investigation under 
Section 173(8) of CrPC and provide a copy of the case diary. However, 
the Court did not pass any order to the extent of requisitioning the 
Investigating Officer to conduct further investigation.
35.	 Further, vide letter dated 26.04.2021, the Superintendent of Police 
informed the Additional Superintendent of Police/Divisional Officer, 
Crime Branch, A.A.D., Agra, about the nomination of the IO in 
the present case and directed him to complete the investigation 
expeditiously, submit monthly progress reports, and forward the final 
report upon completion of the investigation.
36.	 Thus, it is amply clear that the Superintendent of Police acted in 
complete defiance of the procedure laid down under the law while 
passing orders directing further investigation without seeking leave 
of the Court. It is an unbecoming conduct from the officer of such 
a rank to exercise unfettered powers, in excess of its jurisdiction, 
thereby undermining the authority vested in the Court of law. 
37.	 The learned AAG relied upon the judgment of this Court in Dharam 
Pal (supra) to suggest that the investigating agency has unrestricted 

496
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
powers to conduct further investigation and is only required to inform 
the Court about the same. However, we find the reliance placed 
by learned AAG to be misplaced as the facts of the said case are 
completely in contrast with the present one. In Dharam Pal (supra), 
this Court was dealing with a situation wherein the complainant sought 
transfer of the investigation to the CBI, alleging several lapses in the 
investigation. The High Court declined such a transfer, noting that 
the trial had already commenced and several witnesses had been 
examined. This Court, therein, while setting aside the judgment of 
the High Court, transferred the investigation (de novo) to the CBI 
and held that while the constitutional courts can direct fresh/de 
novo/reinvestigation. Additionally, in Dharam Pal (supra), this Court, 
while referring to Vinay Tyagi (supra), has held that the Magistrate 
is empowered to direct “further investigation” as per its discretion 
based upon the facts and circumstances of the case. 
38.	 In view of the above discussion, the impugned judgment dated 
20.11.2023 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, 
Lucknow Bench in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 4000 of 2022 is 
set aside. In addition to that, the communication dated 06.06.2019 
and order dated 26.04.2021 passed by the Respondent No. 1 and 
Respondent No. 4, respectively, directing further investigation, are 
also quashed and set aside. 
39.	 We further make it clear that the opinions expressed herein should 
cause no prejudice to the criminal revision preferred by the original 
complainant or any other proceeding related to FIR No. 70/2013. 
The Court of District and Sessions Judge, Firozabad shall decide 
the Criminal Miscellaneous Case No. 440 of 2017 and any other 
proceeding, if any, on its own merits.
40.	 Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. Pending application(s), if any, 
shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
