[2026] 2 S.C.R. 381 : 2026 INSC 125
Shashin Patel and Anr.
v.
Uday Dalal and Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 795 of 2026)
05 February 2026
[Vikram Nath and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the belated prayer of the appellants in Civil Appeal 
No. 795 of 2026, being the successors-in-interest of ‘NP’, to 
gain membership in the Society by making payment at a highly 
belated stage, could have been accepted by the Joint Registrar.
Headnotes†
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 – ‘NP’-
Predecessor-in-interest of the appellants was in occupation 
of Flat No.7 in the building in the Co-operative Housing 
Society (Society-respondent No.7) as a tenant thereof – 
Dispute inter se parties pertains to Flat No.7 and the claim 
of the appellants for grant of membership of the society – 
Allegedly there was disinclination on the part of ‘NP’ to make 
the requisite contribution be admitted as a member thereof 
and he conveyed his intention to continue as a tenant of the 
Society – Appellants in Civil Appeal No. 795 of 2026 initiated 
steps for being admitted as members of the Society and filed 
an application before the Authorised Officer of the Society – 
However, the Authorised Officer informed the appellants 
that he was not empowered to take any policy decision 
and, therefore, could not decide the appellants’ application 
for membership – Appellants filed appeal before the Deputy 
Registrar, Co-operative Societies u/s.23(2) – Deputy Registrar 
directed the Authorised Officer to convene a Special General 
Body Meeting (SGBM) of the Society for taking a decision 
on the appellants’ application for membership within thirty 
days – Appellants filed Revision before the Divisional Joint 
Registrar, allowed and the appellants were inter alia directed 
* Author

382
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to be admitted as joint-members of the Society in respect of 
Flat No.7 – Challenged by three members of the erstwhile 
society (respondent Nos.1-3 herein), Writ Petition filed 
before the High Court – In the interregnum, the appellants 
conveyed the flat in question to one M/s. Capital Mind 
Advisory Services Private Limited (appellant in Civil Appeal 
@ SLP (Civil) No.36057 of 2025) – High Court partly allowed 
the writ petition:
Held: Peaceful possession and occupation of ‘NP’ and, thereafter, 
his legal heirs, i.e. the appellants in Civil Appeal 795 of 2026, 
over Flat No.7 has never been in question – The Society, in its 
AGM held on 30.09.2025, resolved to re-affirm the proceedings 
and decisions of the AGM dated 11.08.2005, and the membership 
of the appellants in Civil Appeal 795 of 2026 was accepted by 
the General Body as being legal and valid – Furthermore, it also 
accepted and approved the membership of M/s. Capital Mind 
Advisory Services Private Limited, in respect of Flat No.7 in its AGM 
held on 30.09.2025 – High Court, while allowing the writ petition 
filed by respondent Nos.1-3, reasoned that the Joint Registrar 
had acted in excess of his jurisdiction in directing the Authorised 
Officer of the society to grant membership to the appellants in 
Civil Appeal 795 of 2026 – However, such a conclusion cannot 
be countenanced in view of the fact that the appellants in the 
said appeal had initially approached the Authorised Officer of 
the society by way of an application seeking membership, which 
was refused on the ground that he did not have the jurisdiction to 
take policy decisions – It was only thereafter that the appellants 
in the said civil appeal availed of the statutory remedies of appeal 
and revision provided under the MCS Act, 1960 – Furthermore, 
in view of the decision taken by the General Body in the AGM 
dated 30.09.2025, the membership of the appellants in the said 
civil appeal has already been ratified – Hence, the reasoning 
adopted by the High Court is unsustainable in law and cannot 
be upheld  – The entitlement of the appellants as members of 
the Society is recognized – Thus, the subsequent transfer of Flat 
No.7 in favour of M/s. Capital Mind Advisory Services Private 
Limited, by a registered Deed of Transfer and the consequential 
admission of the said transferee as a member of the Society, 
which has already been ratified by the General Body in its AGM 
held on 30.09.2025, must necessarily stand recognised in law – 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
383
Shashin Patel and Anr. v. Uday Dalal and Ors.
Impugned judgment of the High Court set aside to the extent of 
Para Nos.58 (ii) to (i). [Paras 42-46]
List of Acts
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960.
List of Keywords
Co-operative Housing Society; Membership in the Co-operative 
Housing Society; Membership in the Co-operative Housing Society 
ratified; Members of the Co-operative Housing Society; Delayed 
payment of the membership fee; Payment at a highly belated stage; 
General Body in the AGM; Peaceful possession and occupation; 
Deputy Registrar, Co-operative Societies; Authorised Officer of the 
Co-operative Housing Society; Joint Registrar of the Co-operative 
Housing Society; Special General Body Meeting (SGBM) of the 
Co-operative Housing Society.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 795 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 19.11.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in WP No. 9470 of 2025
With
Civil Appeal No. 796 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Shyam Divan, Rudreshwar Singh, Balbir Singh, Sr. Advs., Ms. 
Tushita Ghosh, Aniruddha Choudhury, Rohit, Pranav Deshmukh, Ms. 
Tanishka, Mahesh Agarwal, Rishi Agrawala, Himanshu Saraswat, 
Ms. Bedotroyi Gupta, Ms. Pratima Mishra, E. C. Agrawala.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Dhruv Mehta, Neeraj Kishan Kaul, Aniruddha Joshi, Sr. Advs., 
Deeptakirti Verma, Ms. Neha Sharma, Ms. Nishi Sangtani, 
Subhoday Banerjee, Aayush Agarwala, Yash Dhruva, Shlok Parekh, 
Aman Shekhar, Deeptakirti Verma, Ms. Neha Sharma, Subhoday 
Banerjee, Aayush Agarwala, Yash Dhruva, Shlok Parekh, Aman 
Shekhar, M/s. PBA Legal.

384
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Mehta, J.
1.	
Heard.
2.	
Leave granted.
3.	
At the outset, it is apposite to note that Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, 
learned senior counsel representing respondent Nos.1 to 3, namely, 
Uday Dalal, Ajay Biyani and Rina Pritish Nandy, and Shri Dhruv 
Mehta, learned senior counsel representing respondent No.7-Malboro 
House Co-operative Housing Society Limited1, entered appearance 
before this Court on caveat and were accordingly heard.
4.	
Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel representing the 
contesting respondent Nos. 1-3 (writ petitioners before the High 
Court), emphatically submitted that the said respondents are not 
desirous of filing any reply/counter affidavit and that the matter may 
be heard as it stands. Accordingly, we have heard the arguments 
advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants as well as learned 
counsel for the contesting respondents on merits.
5.	
These two appeals by special leave call into question the judgment 
dated 19th November, 2025 passed by the learned Single Judge of 
the High Court of Judicature at Bombay2 in Writ Petition No.9470 of 
2025. The dispute inter se parties pertains to Flat No. 7 situated in 
the building known as Malboro House, located at 3-D, Dr. Gopalrao 
Deshmukh Marg, Peddar Road, Mumbai - 400026, and the claim of 
the appellants for grant of membership of the society. 
6.	
Malboro House Co-operative Housing Society Limited (respondent 
No.7) stands on a parcel of land situated at 3-D, Dr. Gopalrao 
Deshmukh Marg, Peddar Road, Mumbai - 400026. The building 
comprises of seven residential flats. The property was originally 
owned by Smt. Soonabai Seervai, who conveyed her right, title, and 
interest therein to M/s. Kamani Brothers Pvt. Ltd. The occupants of 
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as ‘the Society’.
2	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “High Court”.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
385
Shashin Patel and Anr. v. Uday Dalal and Ors.
all seven flats, including Shri Narendra Patel (predecessor-in-interest 
of the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 36106 of 2025), 
were tenants under M/s. Kamani Brothers Pvt. Ltd. 
7.	
M/s. Kamani Brothers Pvt. Ltd. went into liquidation, and consequential 
proceedings were initiated before the learned Company Judge of 
the High Court. The company had outstanding liabilities, particularly 
towards the KEC International Ltd. Employees’ Gratuity Fund, 
approximately to the tune of Rs.61,36,000/-, which were required to 
be settled in the course of the liquidation proceedings. The subject 
building was under charge for recovery of the said amount. 
8.	
The tenants occupying the seven flats collectively resolved to form 
a cooperative housing society and submitted a proposal before the 
learned Company Judge seeking conveyance of the said land and 
building to the society. The proposal was accepted and, pursuant 
to the order passed by the Company Judge and upon payment of a 
sum of Rs.15 Lacs by the Society, the Official Liquidator executed 
a deed of conveyance dated 31st May, 1995 in favour of the Chief 
promoters, namely, Shri S. Agarwal and Shri Ashwin Parekh of the 
proposed Kamani House Co-operative Housing Society Limited, 
which was later rechristened as Malboro House Co-operative Housing 
Society Limited (respondent No.7).
9.	
Indisputably, Shri Narendra Patel, being the predecessor-in-interest 
of the appellants (Shashin Patel and Bhavini Patel) in Civil Appeal 
@ SLP(Civil) No. 36106 of 2025, was in occupation of Flat No.7 as 
a tenant thereof. The occupants of the remaining six flats, excluding 
Shri Narendra Patel, made a collective contribution as mentioned 
above to be paid to the Official Liquidator towards settlement of the 
claims of KEC International Ltd. Employee’s Gratuity Fund. The Chief 
Promoter of the Society addressed repeated communications to Shri 
Narendra Patel, calling upon him to contribute his share, quantified 
at Rs.5,00,000/-, towards induction in the Society and informing him 
that upon payment of the said amount, he would be admitted as a 
member thereof.
10.	 It is the case of the promoters that Shri Narendra Patel expressed 
his disinclination to make the requisite contribution and conveyed 
his intention to continue as a tenant of the Society. This assertion is 
disputed by the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 36106 
of 2025, being the successors of Shri Narendra Patel, who contend 

386
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
that he had expressed readiness and willingness to make the said 
contribution, subject to the promoters furnishing necessary particulars 
and justification for the quantification of the amount so demanded.
11.	 The administration of the Society ran into heavy weather and 
elections to the Managing Committee were not conducted regularly 
whereupon, one of the members of the Society namely, Rina Pritish 
Nandy (respondent No.3 herein), raised a grievance before the 
Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, D Division, Mumbai, alleging 
that new committee had not been elected upon expiry of the term 
of the Managing Committee which was perpetuating itself illegally. 
The Deputy Registrar, acting on the aforesaid complaint, issued a 
show cause notice on 17th February, 2025, and eventually passed 
an order on 28th February, 2025, appointing an Authorised Officer 
as Administrator to manage the affairs of the Society for the reason 
that the erstwhile Committee had ceased to function and there was 
a vacuum in the management. The Authorised Officer was further 
directed to hold elections for constituting the Managing Committee 
within a period of three months from the date of the said order.
12.	 Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, respondent Nos.1 and 2, along 
with Raghu Palat, another member of the Society, preferred an 
appeal before the Divisional Joint Registrar under Section 152 of the 
Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 19603. The said appeal came 
to be dismissed by order dated 11th March, 2025 with the Divisional 
Joint Registrar finding no infirmity in the order passed by the Deputy 
Registrar, particularly in view of the fact that elections to constitute 
the Managing Committee had not been held in accordance with the 
provisions of the MCS Act, the Rules framed thereunder, and the 
Bye-laws of the Society.
13.	 In the meanwhile, the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 
36106 of 2025 initiated steps for being admitted as members of 
the Society and, to that end, filed an application dated 11th March, 
2025, before the Authorised Officer of the Society. Cheques drawn 
towards the share capital, admission fee, and the contribution of 
Rs.5,00,000/- were enclosed with the said application. However, 
by a communication dated 17th March, 2025, the Authorised Officer 
3	
For short, ‘MCS Act’.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
387
Shashin Patel and Anr. v. Uday Dalal and Ors.
informed the appellants that he was not empowered to take any policy 
decision and, therefore, could not decide the appellants’ application 
for membership. 
14.	 Aggrieved thereby, the said appellants preferred an appeal before 
the Deputy Registrar, Co-operative Societies under Section 23(2) of 
the MCS Act. By order dated 4th April, 2025, the Deputy Registrar 
disposed of the said appeal with a direction to the Authorised Officer 
to convene a Special General Body Meeting (SGBM) of the Society 
for taking a decision on the appellants’ application for membership 
within a period of thirty days.
15.	 Dissatisfied with the aforesaid disposition, the appellants preferred 
Revision Application No.138 of 2025 before the Divisional Joint 
Registrar under Section 154 of the MCS Act. Upon hearing the 
appellants and the Authorised Officer appearing for and on behalf 
of the Society, the Divisional Joint Registrar, by order dated 23rd 
April, 2025, allowed the revision. While doing so, the Revisional 
Authority noted, inter alia, that the material on record indicated that 
in the Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the Society held on 11th 
August, 2005, a resolution had been passed to admit Shri Narendra 
Patel as a member upon receipt of the requisite payment. It was 
further observed that the Deputy Registrar had failed to verify the 
relevant record and had overlooked the fact that the premises of 
the Society had been acquired for and on behalf of the tenants. 
For these reasons, the Divisional Joint Registrar concluded that 
the appellants, being the bona fide occupants of Flat No. 7, were 
entitled to be admitted as members of the Society. Consequently, the 
appellants, namely, Shashin Patel and Bhavini Patel were directed to 
be admitted as joint-members of the Society in respect of Flat No.7, 
and the Respondent No. 7-Society/Authorised Officer was directed 
to issue the share certificate in their favour by making the requisite 
entries in the “I” and “J” Registers and other relevant books and 
records of the Society.
16.	 It would be apposite to mention here that after the order dated 23rd 
April, 2025, passed by the Divisional Joint Registrar allowing the 
revision filed by appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 36106 
of 2025, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 also instituted an eviction suit, 
being RAE No. 590 of 2025 in the Court of Small Causes, Mumbai, 
praying for a decree of eviction and injunction. The foundation of 

388
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the said suit was allegedly a forged and fabricated letter, written by 
Shri Narendra Patel way back in 1995, which stated that he had 
declined to accept the membership and expressed his willingness to 
continue as a tenant. The appellants claim that they became aware 
of these facts only upon receipt of the copy of the plaint and the 
accompanying documents. The said suit is still pending before the 
Court of Small Causes, Mumbai.
17.	 Being aggrieved by the orders dated 11th March, 2025 and 23rd April, 
2025 passed by the Divisional Joint Registrar, three members of the 
erstwhile society, namely, Uday Dalal, Ajay Biyani and Rina Pritish 
Nandy (respondent Nos. 1-3 herein) filed the captioned Writ Petition 
No. 9470 of 2025 before the High Court impleading the Divisional 
Joint Registrar, the Deputy Registrar, Malboro House Co-operative 
Housing Society Limited, the Administrator, and the appellants 
(Shashin Patel and Bhavini Patel) as party respondents.
18.	 It may also be noted that, in the interregnum, the appellants (Shashin 
Patel and Bhavini Patel) conveyed the flat in question to M/s. Capital 
Mind Advisory Services Private Limited (appellant in Civil Appeal @ 
SLP (Civil) No.36057 of 2025) by a registered sale deed. The No 
Objection Certificate of the Society for the said transfer was obtained 
by the appellants through the Administrator by communication/letter 
dated 26th May, 2025.
19.	 The High Court, by the impugned order dated 19th November, 2025, 
partly allowed the writ petition in the following terms: -
“Hence, the following order:
(i) The Petition stands partly allowed.
(ii) The impugned order dated 23rd April 2025 passed by 
the Joint Registrar in Revision Application No. 138 of 2025 
admitting the Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 jointly as member 
of the Society (R4) stands quashed and set aside.
(iii) All consequential actions taken pursuant to the 
aforesaid order dated 23rd April 2025 also stand quashed 
and set aside.
(iv) The order passed by the Deputy Registrar in the Appeal 
No. 34 of 2025 dated 4 April 2025 stands restored.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
389
Shashin Patel and Anr. v. Uday Dalal and Ors.
(v) A Special General Meeting of the Society (R4) be 
convened by the Authorised Officer and the Society (R4) 
shall take a decision on the Application of the Respondent 
Nos. 6 and 7 to grant the membership of the society (R-4), 
within a period of four weeks from today.
(vi) The said meeting shall be presided over by the 
Authorised Officer. However, only the members of the 
society (R4) shall be entitled to vote in the said meeting. 
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 jointly or Respondent No. 9 shall 
not be eligible to participate in the said Special General 
Body Meeting.
(vii) The challenge to the order dated 11th March 2025 in 
Appeal No. 69 of 2025 stands dismissed.
(vii) The original Minute Book produced by the Assistant 
Registrar/Authorised Officer, be returned to the Authorised 
Officer after keeping a true copy of the Resolution dated 
11th August 2005 on record.
(ix) Rule made absolute to the aforesaid extent.
No costs.”
20.	 The aforesaid order dated 19th November, 2025 passed by the learned 
Single Judge of the High Court is the subject matter of challenge in 
Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.36106 of 2025 preferred by the original 
respondent Nos.6 and 7 before the High Court, namely, Shashin 
Patel and Bhavini Patel, and Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.36057 
of 2025 preferred by the subsequent purchaser M/s. Capital Mind 
Advisory Services Private Limited.
Submission on behalf of the appellants
21.	 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants in Civil Appeal 
@ SLP (Civil) No.36106 of 2025, being the legal heirs of late Shri 
Narendra Patel, vehemently and fervently urged that the Society had 
already taken a decision on 11th August, 2005, to admit Shri Narendra 
Patel, the original occupier of Flat No.7 and predecessor-in-interest 
of the appellants as a member of the society. He was at all times 
ready and willing to make the requisite contribution towards acquiring 
membership of the Society. It was urged that the bona fide request 

390
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
made by Shri Narendra Patel for being furnished the particulars and 
basis of calculation of the amount demanded was not acceded to by 
the chief promoters and, as a result, the payment could not be made.
22.	 It was urged that although the High Court noticed the aforesaid 
contentions, it failed to appreciate the same in the correct perspective. 
It was further submitted that the factum of mismanagement in the 
affairs of the Society is not in dispute and, in fact, stands affirmed 
in the impugned judgment. Attention of the Court was drawn to the 
complaint lodged by one of the members of the Society, namely, Rina 
Pritish Nandy (respondent No.3), to the Deputy Registrar, alleging that 
despite the expiry of the term of the Managing Committee, elections 
were not being conducted and that the existing members were 
illegally continuing to run the affairs of the Society. Acting thereon, the 
Deputy Registrar issued a show cause notice and, upon conducting 
an enquiry, found the allegations to be substantiated. Consequently, 
by order dated 28th February, 2025, an Authorised Officer was 
appointed to manage the affairs of the Society. These findings 
have been affirmed by the High Court. It was, therefore, contended 
on behalf of the appellants that in view of the mismanagement by 
those at the helm of the affairs of the Society and failure to furnish 
the requisite details to Shri Narendra Patel, the amount demanded 
towards securing membership in respect of Flat No.7 could not be 
deposited.
23.	 It was submitted that the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) 
No.36106 of 2025, being the legal heirs of late Shri Narendra Patel, 
approached the Authorised Officer seeking permission to deposit the 
requisite amount towards share money and admission fee. Upon the 
Authorised Officer expressing his inability to take a decision on the 
issue, the appellants approached the Deputy Registrar by preferring 
an appeal under Section 23(2) of the MCS Act.
24.	 The Deputy Registrar disposed of the said appeal by order dated 
4th April, 2025, issuing a positive direction to the Authorised Officer 
to convene a Special General Board Meeting of the Society for 
taking a decision on the appellants’ application seeking the grant of 
membership. However, the fact remains that the affairs of the Society 
were in a disarray, and the meeting could not be convened. Thus, 
aggrieved, the appellants preferred a revision before the Divisional 
Joint Registrar, which came to be allowed by order dated 23rd April, 
2025, taking note of the fact that the AGM of the Society held on 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
391
Shashin Patel and Anr. v. Uday Dalal and Ors.
11th August, 2005 had already resolved to admit Shri Narendra Patel 
as a member. 
25.	 It was urged by learned counsel for the appellants in Civil Appeal @ 
SLP (Civil) No.36106 of 2025 that once the Society itself had drawn 
a conscious and considered resolution dated 11th August, 2005, to 
admit Shri Narendra Patel as a member, and since the said resolution 
had never been revoked, recalled or challenged before any forum, 
the delay in depositing the requisite amount could not be used to 
defeat the rights flowing therefrom. It was further submitted that 
the appellants have already deposited the amount of Rs.5,00,000/- 
along with interest calculated at the rate of 9% per annum and, as a 
consequence, their membership in the Society stood duly affirmed.
26.	 It was also contended that the objections raised by the writ petitioners 
and certain other members of the Society to the admission of the 
appellants as members were misconceived and legally untenable. It 
was urged that, at the highest, the Society could only seek payment of 
some additional amount or enhanced interest from the said appellants 
in order to compensate for the delay in making the payment.
27.	 Shri Balbir Singh, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellant-M/s. Capital Mind Advisory Services Private Ltd. 
(subsequent purchaser) in Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.36057 of 
2025, contended that, indisputably, Shri Narendra Patel had been 
in occupation of Flat No.7 as a tenant under M/s. Kamani Brothers 
Private Limited for several decades and, therefore, his right to seek 
admission to membership of the Society could not be defeated 
merely on the ground that he had sought particulars of calculation 
of the amount of Rs.5,00,000/- demanded from him.
28.	 It was further submitted on behalf of the appellants in both the civil 
appeals that by effect of the order of the High Court, the registered 
sale deed executed in favour of M/s. Capital Mind Advisory Services 
Private Limited (the appellant in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 
36057 of 2025) has been nullified, a consequence which cannot be 
countenanced in the eyes of law. 
29.	 Learned counsel for the appellants vehemently contended that the 
factum of the eviction suit filed before the Court of Small Causes, 
Mumbai, was not disclosed by respondent Nos.1-3 (writ petitioners 
before the High Court) in the pleadings of the writ petition, and on 
this ground alone, the writ petition ought to have been dismissed. 

392
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Without prejudice to the above contention, it was further submitted 
that the issues relating to the status of Shri Narendra Patel, his legal 
heirs, and the subsequent purchaser of Flat No.7 ought to have been 
adjudicated in the eviction suit itself, which would necessarily have 
to be decided on the basis of evidence led by the parties therein. 
It was argued that the High Court was not justified in entertaining 
the writ petition involving serious disputed questions of fact, which 
required evidence to be adduced by the parties, and therefore, the 
impugned order is unsustainable in the eyes of the law.
30.	 It was, thus, urged by the learned counsel for the appellants that the 
impugned order is arbitrary and unjust, as the same fails to strike a 
balance in equities. On these grounds, they implored the Court to 
set aside the impugned order and allow the appeals.
Submission on behalf of the respondents
31.	 Per contra, Shri Neeraj Kishan Kaul, learned senior counsel appearing 
on behalf of respondent Nos.1 to 3, being the writ petitioners before the 
High Court, vehemently and strenuously contested and countered the 
submissions advanced on behalf of the appellants. He submitted that 
the case set up by the appellants is full of falsehoods and is tainted 
by concealment of material facts. It was urged that Shri Narendra 
Patel, the original occupant of Flat No.7 and predecessor-in-interest 
of the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.36106 of 2025, 
had consciously avoided depositing the contribution amount, which 
had been equitably apportioned amongst the flat-occupants towards 
acquisition of the building through the Society. The argument raised 
that the amount was not paid as the account details had not been 
provided, is flimsy, far-fetched, and untenable. 
32.	 It was further urged that since Shri Narendra Patel did not deposit 
his contribution to gain membership of the society, the remaining six 
members of the Society were constrained to contribute amounts in 
excess of their respective shares for the purpose of acquiring the 
building which they were occupying as tenants of the Company M/s. 
Kamani Brothers Private Limited, which had gone into liquidation. 
These six members acted in a bona fide manner to save the building 
which faced imminent likelihood of being auctioned for recovery of the 
statutory dues of the company. It was contended that Shri Narendra 
Patel tried to wriggle out his obligations towards the collective 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
393
Shashin Patel and Anr. v. Uday Dalal and Ors.
contribution by using a subterfuge of seeking the account details 
and, in that manner, avoided payment of the amount for induction 
as a member of the Society for over two decades.
33.	 Shri Kaul further submitted that the grant of membership to the 
appellants by the Revisional Authority virtually tantamounts to 
encroachment on the autonomy of the Society and grants immunity 
to the fraudulent stand of Shri Narendra Patel, who continued to 
remain in occupation of Flat No.7 without contributing a dime towards 
his share in the collective acquisition of the property, the burden 
whereof was borne by the remaining members under compulsion. 
It was urged that the belated attempt on the part of the appellants 
to deposit the originally quantified amount of Rs.5,00,000/- towards 
gaining membership ought to have been repelled outright, as such 
payment was made only with a view to secure and safeguard their 
future interest in the property and to keep alive a speculative claim 
over the same, rather than in bona fide compliance with the demand 
raised in the year 2005. He submitted that the cost of the property 
has risen exponentially over the years and thus, the appellants 
cannot be allowed to walk away with the membership of the Society 
by merely making payment of the original amount of Rupees Five 
Lakhs with paltry interest. 
34.	 He urged that the Joint Registrar lacked jurisdiction to grant 
membership to the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.36106 
of 2025, the same being a matter falling exclusively within the domain 
of the Society. It was further submitted that the judgment rendered by 
the High Court, whereby the order passed by the Joint Registrar was 
set aside, is just and proper and does not call for any interference in 
exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction conferred upon this Court 
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
35.	 Shri Kaul, responding to the plea set up by the appellant-M/s. Capital 
Mind Advisory Services Private Ltd. in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) 
No.36057 of 2025 submitted that the said appellant is nothing but 
a speculative property dealer and had consciously purchased the 
property under litigation with full knowledge of the pending disputes in 
relation to the membership of the Society. It was contended that the 
belated and time-barred deposit of the membership amount was made 
at the instance of the said appellant and, in these circumstances, it 
could not claim any equitable relief to validate the sham transaction.

394
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
36.	 Respondent No.7-Society, acting through the Administrator, is 
represented by Shri Dhruv Mehta, learned senior counsel, who 
on instructions, fully supported the cause of the appellants. Shri 
Mehta urged that there was no illegality in the order admitting the 
successors of Shri Narendra Patel as members of the Society and, 
as a consequence thereof, the conveyance deed dated 26th May, 
2025, executed by Shashin Patel and Bhavini Patel in favour of 
M/s. Capital Mind Advisory Services Private Limited is valid in the 
eyes of law.
37.	 He further submitted that, as law does not prohibit admission of the 
appellants as members at a belated stage, the Society may raise a 
claim for higher interest or penal charges on the amount originally 
determined in the year 1995 for the grant of membership. Since 
the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.36106 of 2025 have 
already deposited the membership amount, calculating interest at 
the rate of 9%, there is no difficulty in accepting their membership 
claim. He urged that, at best, the members of the Society, objecting 
to the claim for membership made by the said appellants, may have 
a cause to agitate for enhanced interest on the delayed payment of 
the membership fee. Such issues can be raised and settled in the 
AGM of the Society.
Discussion and Analysis
38.	 We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submissions 
advanced at bar and have gone through the material placed on 
record. We have also carefully perused the impugned judgment. 
39.	 The short controversy which falls for consideration of this Court in 
these appeals is whether the belated prayer of the appellants in Civil 
Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.36106 of 2025, being the successors-in-
interest of Shri Narendra Patel, to gain membership in the Society 
by making payment at a highly belated stage, could have been 
accepted by the Joint Registrar.
40.	 The fact that the said appellants are the legal heirs of Shri Narendra 
Patel, who was admittedly in occupation of Flat No.7 for several 
decades, is not in dispute. It is also undisputed that in the year 1995, 
occupants of the flats, being the erstwhile tenants of M/s. Kamani 
Brothers, collectively resolved to form a co-operative housing society 
to stake a claim of ownership on the building. They filed an application 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
395
Shashin Patel and Anr. v. Uday Dalal and Ors.
to that effect before the learned Company Judge of the Bombay 
High Court, before whom the liquidation proceedings were pending.
41.	 The said application was accepted, and the Society was conveyed 
the right, title, and interest in the building in question in accordance 
with law. Shri Narendra Patel, however, did not make payment of 
the contribution derived towards his induction as a member of the 
society in respect of Flat No.7 and took shelter behind a plea that 
the necessary particulars and justification for the quantification of 
the amount were not provided. For the present, it is not necessary 
to delve into the merits of the said contention. The crucial fact which 
remains undisputed is that the peaceful possession and occupation 
of Shri Narendra Patel and, thereafter, his legal heirs, i.e., Shashin 
Patel and Bhavini Patel, the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) 
No.36106 of 2025, over Flat No.7 has never been in question. The 
erstwhile members of the Society issued a letter dated 13th June, 
1995 to Shri Narendra Patel offering him admission to the society 
membership subject to payment of Rs.5,00,000/-. The said offer letter 
is undisputed and does not appear to have ever been withdrawn. 
Further, at the Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the Society held 
on 11th August 2005, a resolution was passed resolving to admit Shri 
Narendra Patel, the original occupier of Flat No. 7 and predecessor-
in-interest of the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP (Civil) No.36106 
of 2025, as a member of the Society upon receipt of the requisite 
payment. 
42.	 In such a situation, the determinative issue would be whether the 
appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 36106 of 2025 could 
be denied the benefit of seeking membership of the Society while 
continuing to remain in occupation of the premises. It is not the case 
of the writ petitioners before the High Court (respondent Nos.1 to 
3 herein) that the occupation of Shri Narendra Patel or that of his 
successors, namely, the appellants herein, in respect of Flat No.7 is 
illegal, nor is it their case that any proceedings were initiated by the 
Society before any competent forum prior to 2025 for evicting them 
from the premises. In this backdrop, denial of the appellants’ request 
for grant of membership would create a serious anomaly inasmuch 
as the appellants would continue to occupy Flat No.7 without being 
conferred membership of the Society, creating a subsisting tussle 
and friction with the remaining occupants of the building/members 
of the Society.

396
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
43.	 It is apposite to mention here that the Society, in its AGM held on 30th 
September, 2025, resolved to re-affirm the proceedings and decisions 
of the AGM dated 11th August, 2005, and that the membership of 
the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 36106 of 2025, i.e., 
Shashin Patel and Bhavini Patel was accepted by the General Body 
as being legal and valid. It was further resolved that the appellants 
in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 36106 of 2025 had thereafter 
transferred Flat No. 7 to M/s. Capital Mind Advisory Services Private 
Limited (appellant in Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 36057 of 2025) 
under a duly registered Deed of Transfer, pursuant to which M/s. 
Capital Mind Advisory Services Private Limited was admitted as a 
member of the Society. The General Body recorded that the said 
transfer and admission were in accordance with the Society’s bye-
laws and the provisions of the MCS Act, and accordingly accepted 
and approved the membership of M/s. Capital Mind Advisory Services 
Private Limited, in respect of Flat No. 7. We have not been informed 
about the minutes of the AGM dated 30th September, 2025, being 
challenged before any forum.
44.	 The High Court, while allowing the writ petition filed by respondent 
Nos. 1-3, reasoned that the Joint Registrar had acted in excess of his 
jurisdiction in directing the Authorised Officer of the society to grant 
membership to the appellants in Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No.36106 
of 2025. However, such a conclusion cannot be countenanced in 
view of the fact that the appellants in the said appeal had initially 
approached the Authorised Officer of the society by way of an 
application seeking membership, which came to be refused on the 
ground that he did not have the jurisdiction to take policy decisions. 
It was only thereafter that the appellants in the said civil appeal 
availed of the statutory remedies of appeal and revision provided 
under the MCS Act, 1960. Furthermore, in view of the decision taken 
by the General Body in the AGM dated 30th September, 2025, the 
membership of the appellants in the said civil appeal has already 
been ratified. Hence, the reasoning adopted by the High Court is 
unsustainable in law and cannot be upheld.
45.	 In this backdrop, the only equitable solution would be to recognise 
the entitlement of Shashin Patel and Bhavini Patel as members of the 
Society. Once such entitlement is recognised, the subsequent transfer 
of Flat No.7 in favour of M/s. Capital Mind Advisory Services Private 
Limited, by a registered Deed of Transfer and the consequential 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
397
Shashin Patel and Anr. v. Uday Dalal and Ors.
admission of the said transferee as a member of the Society, which 
has already been ratified by the General Body in its AGM held on 
30th September, 2025, must necessarily stand recognised in law.
46.	 In the wake of the discussion made hereinabove, we hereby set 
aside the impugned judgment of the High Court to the extent of 
Para Nos. 58 (ii) to (vi). 
47.	 We, however, provide that the aggrieved members of the Society, 
if so advised, would be at liberty to move an application before the 
appropriate authority/body for the determination of a suitable additional 
amount payable by the appellants by way of enhanced interest, as 
may be determined, having regard to the significant delay in making 
payment of the contribution for the acquisition of membership in the 
Society. If any challenge is laid to the decision taken in the AGM 
dated 30th September, 2025, as to the membership of the appellants, 
the same would be examined as per law without being prejudiced 
by the above observations.
48.	 It is further made clear that the parties will be at liberty to work out 
their remedies before the appropriate forum(s) in accordance with law. 
49.	 The appeals are partly allowed in these terms. No order as to costs.
50.	 Pending applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
