[2026] 2 S.C.R. 402 : 2026 INSC 128
Amit Kumar & Ors.
v.
Union of India & Ors.
(Interlocutory Application No. 25652 of 2026)
In
(Criminal Appeal No. 1425 of 2025)
06 February 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Interlocutory application was filed seeking direction as regards 
the appointment of Dr. T.C.A. Anant, former Chief Statistician 
of India, as Technical Consultant to the National Task Force for 
comprehensive and scientific analysis of the survey data and; 
direction to the Ministry of Education to extend all necessary 
administrative support, infrastructure, data access, and to provide 
appropriate remuneration/honorarium to Dr. Anant, as per prevalent 
norms or as may be fixed by the Court.
Headnotes†
Interlocutory Application – Interlocutory application filed for 
the appointment of Dr. T.C.A. Anant, former Chief Statistician 
of India, as Technical Consultant to the National Task Force 
for comprehensive and scientific analysis of the survey data 
and; direction to the Ministry of Education, Union of India, to 
extend all necessary administrative support, infrastructure, 
data access, and to provide appropriate remuneration/
honorarium to Dr. Anant, as per prevalent norms or as may 
be fixed by the Court:
Held: Dr. T.C.A. Anant, former Chief Statistician of India is 
appointed as Technical Consultant to the National Task Force for 
the purpose of comprehensive and scientific analysis of the survey 
data – Ministry of Education, Union of India shall pass an order of 
his appointment at the earliest – Ministry to extend all necessary 
administrative support, more particularly the infrastructure & data 
access and to provide appropriate remuneration/honorarium to 
Dr. Anant in accordance with prevalent norms. [Para 3]

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
403
Amit Kumar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
List of Keywords
National Task Force; National Task Force to address the mental 
health concerns of students and prevent the commission of suicides 
in Higher Educational Institutions; Technical Consultant to the 
National Task Force; Comprehensive and scientific analysis of the 
survey data; Direction to the Ministry of Education, Union of India, 
Administrative support; Data access; Appropriate remuneration/
honorarium.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Interlocutory Application 
No. 25652 of 2026 in Criminal Appeal No. 1425 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.01.2024 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in WPCRL No. 2945 of 2023
Appearances for Parties
Ms. Aparna Bhat Sr. Adv./Amicus Curiae.
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Mehmood Pracha, R. H. A. Sikander, Jatin Bhatt, Sanawar, Kshitij 
Singh, Ms. Nujhat Naseem, Sikander Raza, Faisal Mohammad, 
Kumail Abbas, Mayank Sapra, Ms. Karishma Maria, Ms. Lalima Das.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
K.M. Nataraj, Brijender Chahar, A.S.G.s., Lokesh Sinhal, Sr. A.A.G., 
Shiv Mangal Sharma, Ms. Karishma Malani, Anil Shrivastav, Aman 
Panwar, A.A.G.s., Rudratiya Khare, D.A.G., Chitransh Sharma, 
Vatsal Joshi, Anuj Srinivas Udupa, Ms. Ruchi Kohli, Arvind Kumar 
Sharma, Ms. Mrinal Gopal Elker, Mukesh Kumar Maroria, Amit 
Sharma Ii, Mrs. Bani Dikshit, Varun Chugh, Gaurang Bhushan, 
Jagdish Chandra, Ms. Swati Ghildiyal, Ms. Neha Singh, Ms. K. 
Enatoli Sema, Amit Kumar Singh, Ms. Chubalemla Chang, Prang 
Newmai, Ms. Yanmi Phazang, Ms. Vidushi Bajpai, Samar Vijay 
Singh, Ms. Sabarni Som, Aman Dev Sharma, Nikunj Gupta, Sarthak 
Arya, Gaj Singh, Ms. Ishika Gupta, Vikramaditya Chauhan, Subrata 
Chakraborty, Sourabh Dahiya, Amith Krishnan H, Parmanand Gaur, 
Ms. Megha Gaur, Vibhav Mishra, Ms. Shalini Singh, Ms. Nidhi 
Jaswal, Gautam Singh, Parth Awasthi, Pashupathi Nath Razdan, 
Mahesh Agarwal, Rishi Agrawala, Ms. Madhavi Agarwal, Sanjeevi 
Seshadri, Akshay Agarwal, Manish Sharma, E. C. Agrawala, Akshay 

404
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Amritanshu, Nikunj Gupta, Ms. Ishika Gupta, Sarthak Srivastava, 
Mayur Goyal, Sarthak Arya, Ms. Seema Sindhu, Abhay Nair, 
Ms. Harsh Rekha, Ms. Disha Singh, Ms. Eliza Bar, Ms. Swati 
Ghildiyal, Ms. Neha Singh, Sanchit Garga, Abhinav Kumar, Manav 
Kaushik, Kunal Rana, Shashwat Jaiswal, Bhanu Pratap Singh, 
Ms. Diksha Arora, Kaushal Gautam, Ms. Snehpreet Kaur, Prashant 
Alai, Kunal Mimani, Shrirang B. Varma, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, 
Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Avijit Mani Tripathi, Upendra Mishra, 
P.S. Negi, T.K. Nayak, Ms. Marbiang Khongwir, Nishe Rajen 
Shonker, Mrs. Anu K Joy, Santhosh K, Alim Anvar, Mrs. Devika 
A.l., Ms. Shashi Bala, Praveen Chaudhary, Sanpreet Singh Ajmani, 
Amit Kumar, Ms. Amitoz Kaur, Ms. Shivani Agrahari, Mohit Kumar 
Gupta, Ms. Misha Rohatgi, Nakul Mohta, Amulya Upadhyay, Ayush 
Kashyap, Sameer Abhyankar, Aryan Srivastava, Krishna Rastogi, 
Sudarshan Lamba, Abhijeet Pandove, Amit Sharma B, Gaurang 
Bhushan, Ms. Bani Dikshit, Jagdish Chandra, Karan Chahar, 
Rajbahadur Yadav, Aor, Pukhrambam Ramesh Kumar, Karun 
Sharma, Ms. Anupama Ngangom, Ms. Rajkumari Divyasana.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
Heard Ms. Aparna Bhat, the learned Amicus Curiae and Mr. K.M. 
Nataraj, the learned Additional Solicitor General for the Union of India.
2.	
By this application the following has been prayed for:-
“a) Direct the appointment of Dr. T.C.A. Anant, former 
Chief Statistician of India, as Technical Consultant to the 
National Task Force for comprehensive and scientific 
analysis of the survey data; 
b) Direct the Ministry of Education, Union of India, to 
extend all necessary administrative support, infrastructure, 
data access, and to provide appropriate remuneration /
honorarium to Dr. Anant, as per prevalent norms or as 
may be fixed by this Hon’ble Court.” 
3.	
We direct that :- 
(i)	
Dr. T.C.A. Anant, former Chief Statistician of India be appointed 
as Technical Consultant to the National Task Force for the 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
405
Amit Kumar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
purpose of comprehensive and scientific analysis of the survey 
data. 
(ii)	
The Ministry of Education, Union of India shall pass an order 
of appointment of Dr. T.C.A. Anant at the earliest.
(iii)	 We also direct the Ministry of Education, Union of India to 
extend all necessary administrative support, more particularly 
the infrastructure & data access and to provide appropriate 
remuneration/honorarium to Dr. Anant in accordance with 
prevalent norms. 
4.	
With the aforesaid directions, this interlocutory application stands 
disposed of accordingly. 
Result of the case: Interlocutory application disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
