[2026] 2 S.C.R. 362 : 2026 INSC 119
Rupesh Kumar Meena
v.
Union of India & Others
 (Civil Appeal No(s). 11302-11303 of 2016)
04 February 2026
[Rajesh Bindal* and Atul S. Chandurkar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the appellant herein should be allowed to change his 
cadre from Tamil Nadu to Rajasthan, against the ‘insider’ vacancy. 
The selection pertains to the year 2004. The appellant is already 
in service in Tamil Nadu for more than two decades.
Headnotes†
Service Law – Joining of cadre – The first two candidates 
chose not to join the Rajasthan cadre, offerred on the basis 
of ‘insider’ vacancy, the appellant staked his claim to be 
considered for appointment against the same – He filed OA 
before the Tribunal, which was dismissed – The High Court 
upheld the same – Review Application was also dismissed – 
Correctness:
Held: The undisputed facts which emerge from the material on 
record are that the appellant who belonged to ST Category was 
selected and appointed to IPS in the Combined Civil Services 
Examination held in the year 2004 – As per his merit, he was 
allocated Tamil Nadu Cadre where he is serving ever since his 
appointment – The first two candidates chose not to join the 
Rajasthan cadre – By this time, six years had lapsed for the 2004 
selection – The appellant who was third in the merit list claimed 
entitlement to be offered the ‘insider’ vacancy – Rather, his case 
is when the second candidate did not join, he should be offered 
that vacancy – Such a process cannot be adopted – It will result 
in the process of allocation or change of cadres fluid for all times 
to come – The result thereof may be, that after shifting of the 
appellant from Tamil Nadu to Rajasthan, in terms of the merit list 
for the 2004 Selection, a candidate below the appellant may claim 
change of cadre, who other wise may have been allocated to some 
* Author

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
363
Rupesh Kumar Meena v. Union of India & Others
other State – This may also have effect on appointment against 
any ‘insider’ vacancy – Finality has to be attached to the process 
of selection – No material has been produced to show that the 
aforesaid ‘insider’ vacancy for the year 2004 was still lying vacant 
for the period of more than 20 years that have passed – No merit 
found in appeals and same are dismissed. [Paras 6, 9, 12, 13]
List of Keywords
Service Law; Cadre; Vacancy; Joining of cadre; Insider vacancy; 
Selection; Appointment; Combined Civil Services Examination; 
Tamil Nadu Cadre; Rajasthan cadre; Entitlement; Process of 
allocation.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 
11302-11303 of 2016
From the Judgment and Order dated 26.08.2011 and 21.10.2011 
of the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in WP No. 6215 of 2011 
and RP No. 612 of 2011, respectively
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Dr. Sarbjit Sharma, Dr. Sumit Sharma, Ms. Manishi Raj, Abhishek 
Sharma, S. K. Verma.
Adv. for the Respondent(s):
Vinayak Sharma, Ms. Alka Agarwal, Arvind Kumar Sharma, 
Mrs. Priya Puri.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.	
The appellant is an IPS Officer of Tamil Nadu Cadre. He was selected 
against a vacancy meant for Scheduled Tribe (ST) category. He filed 
the present appeals challenging the orders1 passed by the High 
1	
Dated 26.08.2011 in W.P.(C) No.6215 of 2011 and 21.10.2011 in Review Petition No.612 of 2011

364
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Court2. Vide the order dated 26.08.2011, the High Court upheld the 
order3 passed by the Tribunal,4 by which the application5 filed by the 
appellant was dismissed. Subsequently, review petition filed by the 
appellant was also dismissed by the High Court. 
2.	
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that one Rishikesh Meena 
appeared in Civil Services Examination held in the year 2003. As 
per the merit list, he was selected in the Indian Police Service (IPS) 
and was allocated West Bengal cadre. He again appeared in 2004 
Civil Services Examination and qualified against the vacancy of an 
IPS Officer. As he was already serving as an IPS Officer, he never 
chose to join the 2004 batch, as he was to lose one year seniority. 
In this batch, he was even offered ‘insider’ vacancy of IPS cadre in 
the State of Rajasthan, however, he did not accept the same as well. 
2.1	 Next Officer in the merit list for ‘insider’ vacancy in the State 
of Rajasthan for the batch of 2004, was Rajesh Kumar. His 
claim was that since Rishikesh Meena did not accept the 
offer for ‘insider’ vacancy in the State of Rajasthan, he should 
be offered the same. His claim was rejected by the Union of 
India. Otherwise, he was originally allocated to Orissa Cadre. 
Aggrieved against the rejection of his claim for re-allocation, 
Rajesh Kumar filed O.A. No.102 of 2007 before the Tribunal. 
The Tribunal vide order dated 02.01.2008 allowed the aforesaid 
O.A. and directed that ‘insider’ vacancy in the State of Rajasthan 
should be offered to Rajesh Kumar as offer of appointment to 
Rishikesh Meena had not been accepted by him. 
2.2	 Aggrieved against the same, Union of India preferred writ 
petition6 before the High Court. As during the pendency of 
the aforesaid writ petition, Rajesh Kumar was selected in the 
Indian Administrative Service (IAS), he joined as such and his 
grievance did not survive. The High Court disposed of the writ 
petition on 14.09.2010, leaving the question of law open. 
2	
High of Delhi at New Delhi
3	
Dated 08.03.2011 
4	
Central Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench, Delhi
5	
O.A. No.2326 of 2010
6	
Writ Petition No.5221 of 2008

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
365
Rupesh Kumar Meena v. Union of India & Others
2.3	 The appellant/Rupesh Kumar Meena was third in the merit list 
for insider vacancy in the Rajasthan cadre in the batch of 2004 
examination. The moment the first two candidates chose not 
to join the Rajasthan cadre, offerred on the basis of ‘insider’ 
vacancy, the appellant staked his claim to be considered for 
appointment against the same. He filed OA7 before the Tribunal, 
which was dismissed vide order dated 08.03.2011. The High 
Court upheld the same, vide the order dated 26.08.2011. 
Even review appliation was also dismissed vide order dated 
21.10.2011. These are the orders impugned before this Court. 
3.	
The argument raised by the learned counsel for the appellant is that, 
the stand of the respondents that when the vacancy was offered to 
Rishikesh Meena, the same stood filled, was wrong. He submitted 
that, ever since the appellant was appointed to IPS and allocated the 
Tamil Nadu cadre, he has been serving in that State. The only issue 
for consideration in the present appeal is regarding his allocation to 
Rajasthan cadre on ‘insider’ vacancy for which he has a legitimate 
right, being eligible and entitled to the same, as two other candidates, 
senior to him in the merit list, had not joined the Rajasthan cadre 
against that vacancy. It is not a change of cadre rather merely a 
correction. The situation became clear only in the year 2010 when 
despite the Tribunal’s order in favour of Rajesh Kumar, he did not join 
to occupy the ‘insider’ vacancy in the State of Rajasthan, as he was 
selected in the IAS cadre, during the pendency of the writ petition 
filed by the Union of India. Immediately thereafter, the appellant had 
raised his grievance. There is no delay as such. It was further argued 
that there are numerous examples wherein similar adjustments were 
made by the Union of India later on, hence, delay does not matter. 
He further submitted that the said vacancy is still available, as it 
was not filled up.
4.	
In response, learned counsel for the Union of India, submitted that, 
in the case in hand there is no dispute that the appellant was rightly 
allocated Tamil Nadu Cadre after his selection to IPS. There is 
huge delay in filing of the application (O.A. No.2326 of 2010) by the 
appellant before the Tribunal. The allocation to a cadre cannot be kept 
7	
O.A. No.2326 of 2010

366
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
pending for years together for change, in the manner suggested by 
the appellant. The ‘insider’ vacancy in the State of Rajasthan pertains 
to the year 2004. For the first time, issue was raised by the appellant 
in the year 2010. In fact, prior to that, he did not have any right as 
the person selected and senior to him, namely, Rajesh Kumar, was 
available and was also litigating for his claim. If the argument of the 
appellant is accepted at this stage, this will open a pandora’s box. 
Shifting of appellant from Tamil Nadu cadre to Rajasthan cadre will 
create a vacancy in the Tamil Nadu cadre for the year 2004. Meaning 
thereby, reshuffling in the list of the selected candidates in that year. 
Consequently, someone selected in that year may also claim that, 
for the vacancy arising on account of the shifting of the appellant 
from Tamil Nadu to Rajasthan, he may be entitled to Tamil Nadu 
cadre and so on and so forth. The allocation of cadre will never be 
final and it will remain fluid for all times to come, leading to a kind 
of chain reaction. 
4.1	 He further submitted that the definite stand taken by the Union 
of India before the Tribunal was that once a selected candidate 
is allocated to a specific cadre (including on insider vacancy), 
as in the case in hand, the vacancy stands consumed. Meaning 
thereby, when Rishikesh Meena was allocated to ‘insider’ 
vacancy in the State of Rajasthan, the same stood consumed. 
Hence, appellant cannot raise any claim on that post. 
4.2	 He further submitted that against the order passed by the 
Tribunal in favour of Rajesh Kumar, the Union of India had 
filed writ petition and while the matter was sub judice, he got 
selected to IAS. The High Court while disposing of the writ 
petition clearly mentioned that the impugned order passed by 
the Tribunal will not be treated as a precedent and the question 
of law was kept open. He further submitted that if there is any 
error in the allocation of cadre, the correction is always done 
but not in the type of cases the appellant is claiming relief.
5.	
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the paperbook. 
The arguments in the appeal were heard on 22.01.2026 and the 
judgement was reserved. Learned counsel for Union of India was 
permitted to supply copy of the Rules or instructions on the subject 
on or before 27.01.2026. Nothing has been supplied. The matter 
cannot be kept pending on that account.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
367
Rupesh Kumar Meena v. Union of India & Others
6.	
The undisputed facts which emerge from the material on record are 
that the appellant who belonged to ST Category was selected and 
appointed to IPS in the Combined Civil Services Examination held in 
the year 2004. As per his merit, he was allocated Tamil Nadu Cadre 
where he is serving ever since his appointment.
7.	
Another candidate, namely, Rishikesh Meena, appeared in the 
2003 examination. As per his merit, he was appointed to the IPS 
Cadre and allocated to the State of West Bengal. Being ambitious, 
Rishikesh Meena appeared in 2004 Civil Services Examination. 
He again qualified for IPS as per the merit list. As there would not 
have been any improvement in his status, he did not join against the 
selection in 2004 Batch. He even did not accept ‘insider’ vacancy of 
IPS Cadre in the State of Rajasthan for 2004 Batch.
8.	
Rajesh Kumar was next in merit after Rishikesh Meena. He staked 
his claim for appointment against ‘insider’ vacancy as Rishikesh 
Meena did not accept the same. His claim was rejected by the 
Competent Authority. Aggrieved against the same, he filed OA No. 
102 of 2007 before the Tribunal. The same was allowed vide order 
dated 02.01.2008. Rajesh Kumar was directed to be allocated 
against ‘insider’ vacancy in the State of Rajasthan. The aforesaid 
order was challenged by the Union of India before the High Court. As 
Rajesh Kumar wanted to progress in his career, he again appeared 
in Combined Civil Services Examination. During the pendency of 
the writ petition before the High Court, he was selected to IAS. As 
a result of which, he was no more interested to join as IPS against 
‘insider’ vacancy in the State of Rajasthan. The writ petition filed by 
the Union of India before the High Court was disposed of, noticing 
that the grievance of Rajesh Kumar did not survive any further. 
However, considering the apprehension of the petitioner before the 
High Court, it was directed that the order of the Tribunal impugned 
before the High Court need not be treated as a precedent and the 
question of law raised therein was left open to be decided in an 
appropriate case. The aforesaid order was passed on 14.09.2010.
9.	
By this time, six years had lapsed for the 2004 selection. The 
appellant who was third in the merit list, claiming to be below Rajesh 
Kumar and entitled to be offered the ‘insider’ vacancy in the State of 
Rajasthan raised his grievance. O.A. was filed before the Tribunal. 
His submission was that the two persons above him in the merit list, 

368
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
having not joined against the ‘insider’ vacancy for the year 2004, 
he should be offered the same. The Tribunal did not find any merit 
in the O.A. and the same was dismissed, finding that the Ministry 
of Home Affairs has not committed any irregularity in allocation of 
cadres. Even if candidate had not joined, the next one will not have 
any right to claim allocation to the same post. The earlier order 
passed in Rajesh Kumar’s case was differentiated. Aggrieved against 
the aforesaid order, the appellant preferred writ petition before the 
High Court, which met with the same fate. 
10.	 In the aforesaid undisputed factual matrix, the issue before this Court 
is, as to whether the appellant should now be allowed to change his 
cadre from Tamil Nadu to Rajasthan, against the ‘insider’ vacancy. 
The selection pertains to the year 2004. The appellant is already 
in service in Tamil Nadu for more than two decades. During the 
interregnum, there have been more than 20 selections as Combined 
Civil Services Examination is an annual process as the effort is 
always to fill up all the vacancies. 
11.	 It is not a case where the allegation of the appellant is regarding any 
illegality committed by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the allocation 
of cadres as per the merit position of the appellant in the 2004 
Combined Civil Services Examination. His claim is based on the 
fact that, candidate senior to him having not accepted the ‘insider’ 
vacancy of 2004 Batch in the State of Rajasthan, the same should 
have been offered to the next candidate. Such a relief having been 
denied to the next candidate Rajesh Kumar, he raised grievance and 
succeeded before the Tribunal. However, he having been selected to 
IAS during the pendency of the writ petition before the High Court, 
was no more interested against that vacancy. The writ petition was 
disposed of in the year 2010. It was at this stage that the appellant 
sought to stake his claim. It was six years down the line as the 
vacancy pertains to the year 2004.
12.	 It is not in dispute that the appellant was not the next candidate in 
the order of merit to be offered the ‘insider’ vacancy in the State of 
Rajasthan, in case the first one had not joined. Rather, his case is 
when the second candidate did not join, he should be offered that 
vacancy. In our view, such a process cannot be adopted. It will result 
in the process of allocation or change of cadres fluid for all times to 
come. The result thereof may be, that after shifting of the appellant 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
369
Rupesh Kumar Meena v. Union of India & Others
from Tamil Nadu to Rajasthan, in terms of the merit list for the 2004 
Selection, a candidate below the appellant may claim change of cadre, 
who other wise may have been allocated to some other State. This 
may also have effect on appointment against any ‘insider’ vacancy. 
Finality has to be attached to the process of selection. Before us, 
no material has been produced to show that the aforesaid ‘insider’ 
vacancy for the year 2004 was still lying vacant for the period of 
more than 20 years that have passed.
13.	 For the reasons mentioned above, we do not find any merit in the 
present appeals and same are accordingly dismissed.
14.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
