[2026] 2 S.C.R. 323 : 2026 INSC 117
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor 
Welfare Association
v.
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 758 of 2026)
04 February 2026
[Pankaj Mithal* and Prasanna B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether part time contractual instructors/teachers appointed in 
Upper Primary School in the State of U.P. are entitled to revision 
of their honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month which was fixed for 
a contract period of eleven months in the year 2013 or would 
continue to receive the same fixed honorarium for years together 
or for all times to come without any increment.
Headnotes†
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – Samagra Shiksha Scheme (subsumed the earlier Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan) – Constitution of India – Article 23 – Part 
time contractual instructors/teachers were appointed in Upper 
Primary School in the respondent-State under the scheme on a 
fixed honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month for a contract period 
of eleven months in the year 2013 – They were continued even 
after the expiry of the aforesaid contractual period on renewed 
basis, year after year, but their honorarium remained fixed at 
Rs.7,000/- per month despite recommendations being made 
by appropriate authorities for its enhancement – Writ petitions 
filed by the instructors/teachers – Single Judge directed for 
the payment of Rs.17,000/- per month w.e.f March 2017 – 
However, Division Bench directed the State Government to 
pay honorarium of Rs.17,000/- per month for the year 2017-
2018 only – Interference with:
Held: Appointment of the part time or contractual instructors/
teachers no longer remained contractual in nature once the 
contract period of eleven months for which they were initially 
* Author

324
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
appointed or the extended contract period stood expired – They 
were not even part time instructors/teachers as they were 
specifically prohibited for taking any job or part time employment 
elsewhere during their spare time – In fact, these instructors/
teachers having continued continuously for over ten years in a 
row are deemed to be employed permanently against deemed 
substantive posts, as with the passage of time and keeping in mind 
the continuity of the work, such posts stand automatically created – 
The honorarium payable to these instructors/teachers cannot 
remain stagnant and the same is revisable periodically at least 
once in three years – Any action of the State/Union Government 
to employ instructors/teachers on a fixed honorarium of Rs.7,000/- 
per month as was initially fixed in 2013-14 amounts to ‘Begar’ 
and unfair practice violative of Article 23 of the Constitution  – 
Part time contractual instructors/teachers appointed in the Upper 
Primary School in the State of U.P. are entitled to revision of their 
honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month which was initially fixed for 
the contract period of eleven months in the year 2013 – Said 
revision has to take place, if not annually then periodically as per 
the discretion of the Project Approval Board (PAB) – Since the 
PAB for the year 2017-18 had determined the said honorarium 
to be Rs.17,000/- per month, all instructors/teachers appointed 
under the scheme are entitled for the payment of the same at 
the rate of Rs.17,000/- per month with effect from 2017-18 till 
further revision takes place – State Government shall start paying 
honorarium to them at the rate of Rs.17,000/- per month w.e.f. 
01.04.2026, arrears thereof shall be paid within six months from 
today – State Government may recover the contribution of the 
Central Government from the Union of India – Right of Children 
to Free and Compulsory Education Rules, 2010 – r.20. [Paras 
70 (i)-(iii), (vii), 72]
Constitution of India – Article 23 – State’s action of withdrawing 
a legitimately enhanced wage and then allowing honorarium 
to remain artificially depressed inconsistent with the spirit 
of Article 23:
Held: The State’s actions created a condition of economic coercion 
that is inconsistent with the constitutional safeguards against forced 
labour – Its action of withdrawing a legitimately enhanced wage 
and then allowing honorarium to remain artificially depressed 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
325
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
would, in substance, be inconsistent with the spirit of Article 23 of 
the Constitution which prohibits all forms of forced labour – The 
State, under the guise of contractual management or financial 
constraint, cannot compel labours/teachers to such coercive 
circumstances – The honorarium fixed for these instructors/teachers 
under the contract cannot remain stagnant and is revisable suitably 
on periodical basis and that if once revised and increased cannot 
be reduced for subsequent periods. [Paras 56, 57]
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – s.7(5) – Plea of the respondent-State was that under 
the scheme, the financial burden with regard to payment of 
honorarium to the instructors/teachers has to be shared by 
the Central Government and the State Government in the ratio 
of 60:40 respectively – Therefore, once the State has fulfilled 
its obligation to contribute 40 per cent of the finances, it was 
upon the Central Government to contribute the remaining 
60 per cent and if the Central Government fails to fulfil its 
obligation, the court could not have directed the State to 
bear that burden thus, the High Court misconstrued various 
provisions of s.7:
Held: Though, s.7 provides for sharing of financial responsibilities 
between the State/Union Territories and the Central Government 
and casts a liability upon both the Governments to share the financial 
burden in such percentage as may be determined from time to 
time by the Central Government in consultation with the State 
Government, nonetheless, s.7(5), in unequivocal terms, saddles 
the State Government with the responsibility to provide funds for 
the implementation of the provisions of the Act – s.7(5) reveals that 
the State Government shall take into account not only the sums 
provided by the Central Government to the State Government but 
also its other resources and shall be responsible to provide funds 
for the implementation of the provisions of the Act – Therefore, 
an onerous duty has been cast upon the State Government to 
implement the provisions of the Act vis-à-vis the payment of 
honorarium to the instructors/teachers – Therefore, in all earnest, 
it is primary duty of the State Government to pay honorarium to 
the instructors/teachers appointed under the Act or the scheme 
formulated thereunder – Thus, initial burden to pay honorarium 
to the instructors/teachers is upon the State Government who is 

326
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
free to recover the contribution of the Central Government from 
the Union of India on the principle of “pay & recover” – Principle 
of “pay and recover”. [Paras 68-70 (vi)]
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – Project Approval Board (PAB):
Held: The PAB is the sole central authority to manage budget and 
finances under the Act and the scheme and to fix honorarium for the 
instructors/teachers appointed thereunder – No other authority has 
any say in the matter concerning finance and budget consequently 
in the fixation of honorarium – The PAB having once approved the 
proposal for fixing Rs.17,000/- per month as honorarium to these 
instructors/teachers, no authority can sit over such a decision and 
pass orders contrary to it – The PAB having fixed honorarium to 
these instructors/teachers at the rate of Rs.17,000/- per month 
with effect from the year 2017-18, the State Government/Central 
is not justified in paying them at a lesser rate of either Rs.8,470/- 
or Rs.9,800/- or at the basic rate of Rs.7,000/- per month. 
[Paras 70 (iv), (v), (ix)]
Samagra Shiksha Scheme (subsumed the earlier Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan) – Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Act, 2009:
Held: There is another reason to treat the instructors/teachers 
appointed in Primary Schools of the State of Uttar Pradesh as 
teachers at par with other teachers – The part time contractual 
instructors/teachers appointed in Upper Primary Schools 
possesses the basic educational qualifications and eligibility as 
set out by the National Council for Teachers Education which 
are at par with the norms laid down for appointment of regular 
teachers – In this view of the matter, the part time contractual 
instructors/teachers appointed by the State Government under 
the Scheme are in no way inferior to the regular teachers or the 
Assistant Teachers appointed otherwise under the scheme  – 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Rules, 
2010. [Para 40]
Samagra Shiksha Scheme (subsumed the earlier Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan), discussed – Right of Children to Free and 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
327
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
Compulsory Education Act, 2009 – Right of Children to Free 
and Compulsory Education Rules, 2010 – r.20:
Held: The instructors/teachers appointed under the scheme have to 
be at par with other instructors/teachers and they have to perform 
not only the academic duties but certain other non-educational 
duties as well – They are entitled to honorarium at par with the other 
instructors/teachers – The honorarium payable to these instructors/
teachers needs to be revised periodically – This periodic revision 
has to be done by none other than PAB and its decision is to be 
treated as final and binding as no other authority or body under 
the Act or the scheme has any power to sit over its decision and 
to take a contrary view. [Paras 59-67]
Service jurisprudence – “substantive appointment”:
Held: The term “substantive appointment” is not so defined but 
in service jurisprudence is considered to mean an appointment, 
not being an ad hoc appointment, on a post made after selection 
in accordance with the rules and in the absence of the rules in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed for under any scheme or 
the instructions of the Government – Therefore, once the instructors/
teachers have undergone the process of selection under the scheme 
regardless of the fact that there existed a post, their appointments 
have to be treated as substantive in character. [Para 45]
Teachers – Role of teachers in nation-building, discussed. 
[Paras 32-37]
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – Samagra Shiksha Scheme (subsumed the earlier 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan) – Preliminary objection raised by the 
State of Uttar Pradesh, relying upon s.24(3), regarding the 
maintainability of the Writ Petition contending that the writ 
petitions were not maintainable as instructors/teachers have 
not exhausted the remedies available under the Act/scheme:
Held: No doubt, the aforesaid provisions make arrangement 
for a redressal of the grievance of the instructors/teachers but 
the grievances referred therein are in context with the default in 
performance of duties by them or in connection with the disciplinary 
action, if any, taken against them – The provisions of s.24 are 
required to be read together and not in isolation – Sub-section (3) 

328
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of s.24, as such, cannot be read divorced Sub-section (1) and (2) 
of s.24 – Moreover, the existence of an alternative remedy under 
a statutory scheme does not operate as an absolute bar to the 
exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution – 
The rule of exclusion of writ jurisdiction on account of availability 
of an alternative remedy is one of prudence and self-restraint, 
not of compulsion – Thus, where the facts so justify, the Court 
retains full discretion to entertain and decide a writ petition 
notwithstanding the availability of an alternative remedy – Thus, the 
objection to the maintainability is unsustainable and is overruled. 
[Paras 28-30]
Recruitment – Regular recruitment – Practice of engaging 
employees on ad hoc, temporary, part time, contractual or 
as guest to be avoided, government should strictly adhere 
to proper procedure for regular recruitment:
Held: An ad hoc employee cannot be replaced by another ad 
hoc employee, a temporary employee cannot be replaced by 
another temporary employee, a contractual employee cannot 
be replaced by another contractual employee and the guest 
employee by another guest employee – The incumbents working 
as aforesaid are entitled to preference in comparison to the 
new candidates, unless there is anything against them – In 
fact, practice of engaging employees on ad hoc, temporary, 
part time, contractual or as guest ought to be avoided and the 
Government should strictly adhere to proper procedure for regular 
recruitment. [Para 44]
Case Law Cited
Rajasthan State Electricity Board v. Union of India [2008] 7 
SCR 1025 : (2008) 5 SCC 632; Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd. [2016] 5 SCR 731 : (2003) 2 SCC 107; Jaggo v. 
Union of India and Ors. [2024] 12 SCR 1235 : 2024 SCC Online 
SC 3826; People’s Union For Democratic Rights v. Union of India 
[1983] 1 SCR 456 : (1982) 3 SCC 235 – referred to.
List of Acts
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009; 
Constitution (Eighty-Sixth Amendment Act), 2002; Constitution of 
India.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
329
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
List of Keywords
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyaan; Samagra Shiksha Scheme; Part time 
contractual instructors/teachers appointed in Upper Primary School 
in the State of U.P.; Revision of honorarium; Honorarium fixed for a 
contract period; Fixed honorarium; Part time contractual instructors/
teachers continued even after the expiry of contractual period; 
Appointment of the part time or contractual instructors/teachers did 
not remain contractual in nature once the contract period or the 
extended contract period stood expired; Not part time instructors/
teachers; Prohibition for taking any job or part time employment 
elsewhere during spare time; Continued continuously for over 
ten years; Ad hoc appointees; Temporary appointees; Part time 
or contractual appointees; Deemed to be employed permanently; 
Deemed substantive posts; Continuity of work; Posts automatically 
created; Honorarium cannot remain stagnant; Honorarium revisable 
periodically; Unfair practice violative of Article 23 of the Constitution; 
Entitled to revision of honorarium; Project Approval Board (PAB); 
discretion of PAB; State Government may recover the contribution 
of the Central Government from the Union of India; Principle of 
“pay and recover”; National Council for Teachers Education.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 758 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.12.2022 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in SAD No. 660 of 2020
With
Civil Appeal No(s). 759-764 and 765-768 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, A.S.G., P S Patwalia, Ardhendhumauli 
Kumar Parshad, S. R. Singh, Sr. Advs., R K Singh, Mrs. Neeraj 
Singh, Kumar Gaurav, Ajay Chaudhary, Ms. Deveshi Chand, 
Ms. Driyyambika Rao, Tom Joseph, Sanjay Kumar Tyagi, Pawan, 
Sandeep Singh, Ms. Anita Tripathi, Ms. K. R. Chitra, Ms. Anita 
Tripathi, Mithilesh Kumar Mishra, Ms. K. R. Chitra, Piyush Singh, 
R. K. Singh, Mrs. Neeraj Singh, Kumar Gaurav, Ajay Chaudhary, 
Praveen Pathak, Sanjay Rastogi, Sanjay Kumar Tyagi, Chetan 
Joshi, Ms. Pankhuri Shrivastava, Udit Dedhiya, Ms. Shreya Jain, 
Raman Yadav, Sudarshan Lamba.

330
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Education, that too good education at least up to the primary level 
based upon values and morals, is fundamental to the progress of 
the nation. 
3.	
Accepting the above fundamental principle, the Constitution (Eighty-
Sixth Amendment Act), 2002 vide Section 2, inserted Article 21A in 
the Constitution of India with effect from 01.04.2010 recognizing 
Right to Education to all children between the age of 6-14 years.
4.	
Article 21A reads as under :-
“21A. Right to education. – The State shall provide free 
and compulsory education to all children of the age of six 
to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by 
law, determine”
5.	
In furtherance of the above objective, the Right of Children to Free 
and Compulsory Education Act, 20091 was enacted on 26.08.2009 
to provide free and compulsory education to all children of the age 
of 6-14 years. 
6.	
The State of U.P., to promote primary education, adopted the centrally 
sponsored scheme of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyaan (now merged into 
Samagra Shiksha Scheme, launched in 2018) and decided to appoint 
part time instructors/teachers on contractual basis in Upper Primary 
Schools (Class VI-VIII) throughout the State of U.P. 
7.	
In order to implement the above programme, the State of U.P. issued 
a Government Order dated 31.01.2013, contemplating to appoint part 
time instructors/teachers on contractual basis on a fixed honorarium 
of Rs.7,000/- per month to impart physical education, education in 
art and work education. The said Government Order stipulated for 
appointment of one instructor/teacher for every one hundred students 
and prescribed the eligibility conditions and the minimum qualifications 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act”

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
331
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
for the appointment of such instructors/teachers in accordance with 
the norms set out by the National Council for Teacher Education2.
8.	
Under the above programme, an advertisement dated 25.02.2013 
was issued by the State of U.P. inviting applications from eligible 
candidates for appointment as part time contractual instructors/
teachers in the Upper Primary Schools of the State. 
9.	
On the basis of the aforesaid advertisement, a vigorous exercise 
was undertaken for the selection of eligible qualified teachers for 
appointment as part time contractual instructors/teachers in the Upper 
Primary Schools. Following the above exercise, a large number of 
teachers came to be appointed under contracts for eleven months 
on a fixed honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month with the condition 
that these instructors/teachers so appointed would not directly or 
indirectly take up any part time or whole-time job anywhere else.
10.	 The instructors/teachers so appointed were continued even after 
the expiry of contractual period of eleven months on renewed basis, 
year after year, but their honorarium remained fixed at Rs.7,000/- 
per month despite the fact that recommendations were made by 
appropriate authorities for the enhancement of the same. Though, 
the recommendations so made were partly accepted and even 
some enhancement was made, but subsequently only the earlier 
fixed honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month was continued and paid 
to them. Aggrieved thereby, they invoked the writ jurisdiction of the 
High Court challenging the decision of the Executive Committee of 
the Shiksha Pariyojna Parishad. 
11.	 The Single Judge of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad decided 
the writ petitions and directed for the payment of Rs.17,000/- per 
month to such instructors/teachers with effect from March 2017. 
However, in Special Appeal to the Division Bench preferred by the 
State, the High Court by the common impugned judgment and order 
dated 02.12.2022 passed in several such Special Appeals, directed 
the State Government to pay honorarium of Rs.17,000/- per month 
for the year 2017-2018 only. 
12.	 Thus, there are eleven appeals preferred against the same common 
impugned judgment and order dated 02.12.2022 passed by the High 
2	
In short ‘NCTE’

332
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Court of Judicature at Allahabad. The first Civil Appeal arising from 
S.L.P.(C) No.9459/2023 is the leading appeal and has been preferred 
by the Welfare Association of instructors/teachers so appointed. The 
second set of six Civil Appeals arising from S.L.P. (C) Nos.1744-
49/2026 is preferred by the State of U.P. against the very same order. 
Lastly, the third set of four Civil Appeals arising from S.L.P. (C) Nos. 
3331-3334/2024 is by some of the part time instructors/teachers in 
their individual capacity.
13.	 The instructors/teachers are aggrieved for the reason that the High 
Court permitted payment of Rs.17,000/- per month as honorarium 
to them only for the year 2017-2018 and not thereafter. The State 
of U.P. is aggrieved for the reason that the burden to pay the said 
honorarium has been saddled upon it, though, it was also for the 
Central Government to have contributed the necessary funds to bear 
that burden and also because of the observations and the findings 
of the High Court regarding the interpretation of Section 7 of the Act.
14.	 It is in these circumstances that all these appeals have come up 
before this Court for consideration raising a common question as 
to whether part time contractual instructors/teachers appointed in 
Upper Primary School in the State of U.P. are entitled to revision 
of their honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month which was fixed for a 
contract period of eleven months in the year 2013 or would continue 
to receive the same fixed honorarium for years together or for all 
times to come without any increment.
15.	 Undisputedly, all the instructors/teachers possessed minimum 
qualifications and fulfilled the eligibility conditions for appointment as 
part time contractual instructors/teachers. They were duly selected 
and were appointed in various Upper Primary Schools of the State 
pursuant to the advertisement dated 25.02.2013. They are all 
continuing to function as such ever since their appointment in the 
year 2013/2014.
16.	 The service contract provided that they will be paid a fixed honorarium 
of Rs.7,000/- per month by the Zila Basic Shiksha Adhikari and that 
the period of their employment would only be eleven months subject 
to renewal but is silent about the honorarium on renewal of term. It 
categorically provided that all such instructors/teachers will not directly 
or indirectly engage in any other whole-time or part time profession 
or business or enter into the service of any other employer. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
333
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
17.	 Some time in the year 2016-2017, the State Government submitted 
a proposal to the Project Approval Board3 for enhancement of the 
honorarium payable to these instructors/teachers to Rs.15,000/- per 
month. However, the PAB, instead of sanctioning Rs.15,000/- per 
month, only sanctioned honorarium of Rs.8,470/- per month for the 
period March 2016 to February 2017. In this way, the honorarium 
payable to these instructors/teachers was revised to Rs.8,470/- per 
month for the above period which stood substituted for the honorarium 
of Rs.7,000/- per month, which was initially fixed. Accordingly, the 
contract stood impliedly modified to the above effect.
18.	 In the year 2017-2018, the State Government submitted a fresh 
proposal to the PAB for the enhancement of honorarium to Rs.17,000/- 
per month which was approved on 27.03.2017 in the 254th Meeting 
of PAB. Based upon the aforesaid approval, the Additional Chief 
Secretary (Basic Education), Government of Uttar Pradesh, issued 
an order on 02.06.2017 stating that the Government of Uttar Pradesh 
had accepted the proposal for payment of Rs.17,000/- per month to 
the part time contractual instructors/teachers for the year 2017-2018. 
However, despite the approval as aforesaid and the letter of the 
Additional Chief Secretary (Basic Education), Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, the necessary funds were not released rather the Executive 
Committee of the Shiksha Pariyojna Parishad of the State reviewed 
the PAB approval and revised the amount of honorarium as Rs.9,800/- 
per month instead of Rs.17,000/- per month as recommended and 
accepted. Accordingly, PAB issued order dated 02.01.2018 fixing 
honorarium to these part time contractual instructors/teachers at the 
rate of Rs.9,800/- per month.
19.	 Despite recommendation and acceptance of the proposal to pay 
honorarium of Rs.17,000/- per month to these part time contractual 
instructors/teachers and thereafter fixation of the honorarium at the 
rate of Rs.9,800/- per month by the PAB, the said instructors/teachers 
were allowed and paid honorarium only at the previously fixed rate 
of Rs.8,470/- per month. 
20.	 To add insult to injury, PAB approved and fixed honorarium of 
Rs.7,000/- for the year 2019-2020 vide its order dated 19.07.2019. 
3	
In short ‘PAB’

334
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Thus, lowering the honorarium revised and paid at Rs.8,470/- from 
March 2016 to Rs.7,000/- per month again. 
21.	 In this manner, all the instructors/teachers so appointed were paid 
honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month from the year 2013 till 2015-
2016; for the year 2016-2017 at the rate of Rs.8,470/- per month; 
for the year 2017-2018 again at the rate of Rs.8,470/- per month 
despite the fact that the Executive Committee of the Shiksha Pariyojna 
Parishad had fixed it at Rs.9,800/- per month, even though, the State/ 
Central Government had accorded approval from PAB for payment 
of Rs.17,000/- per month and from the year 2019-2020 they are 
again paid fixed honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month as initially fixed.
22.	 We have heard Shri P. S. Patwalia, senior counsel on behalf of 
instructors/teachers and Shri Ardhendumauli Kumar Prasad, senior 
counsel on behalf of the State of U.P. and others on the merits of 
the appeals.
23.	 Shri P.S. Patwalia, senior counsel for instructors/teachers argued 
that the honorarium fixed and paid to these teachers at the rate of 
Rs.7,000/- per month, does not even meet the minimum standard 
of wages admissible to the workers. The payment of such meagre 
amount defeats the very purpose and object of free education 
enshrined under the Act. It renders the implementation of the said 
Act as illusory. Secondly, the year wise honorarium paid to such 
instructors/teachers demonstrate prolonged stagnation with no chance 
of promotion and increase in salary, as such, is arbitrary and contrary 
to the statutory mandates. Thirdly, once an approval has been granted 
by the PAB to pay honorarium of Rs.17,000/- per month for the year 
2017-2018 and the same had been accepted by the State/Central 
Government, as reflected by the letter/order dated 02.06.2017 issued 
by the Additional Chief Secretary (Basic Education), Government 
of Uttar Pradesh, the same stands substituted in place of the fixed 
honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month and, as such, it is not open for 
the respondent to resile from the same and to pay Rs.7,000/- per 
month as honorarium for the year 2019-2020 onwards. Lastly, it 
has been submitted that the State cannot discriminate between the 
instructors/teachers appointed to implement the above programme 
with the other instructors/teachers and that the said instructors/
teachers are entitled to periodical enhancement of honorarium so 
as to avoid stagnation. It has been argued that honorarium, once 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
335
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
enhanced and paid, could not have been reduced to Rs.7,000/- per 
month with effect from the year 2019-2020 onwards.
24.	 On behalf of the State of U.P., Shri Ardhendumauli Kumar Prasad 
submitted that in fact the writ petitions itself were not maintainable 
before the High Court inasmuch as the instructors/teachers have not 
exhausted the statutory remedies available to them under the scheme 
as provided under Section 24(3) of Act before approaching the High 
Court. Moreover, the decision to fix honorarium to such instructors/
teachers is a policy decision under the scheme and since it is a policy 
matter, the courts have no role to play and interfere with the same. 
In this connection, he relied upon certain precedents which we would 
refer to, if necessary, at some later stage. Lastly, he argued that these 
instructors/teachers are simply part time contractual workers and 
once they have accepted the terms and conditions of the contract, 
they are estopped from claiming any higher honorarium. They cannot 
approbate and reprobate by accepting the terms of the contract and 
then to challenge the same. Apart from this, under the scheme, the 
financial burden with regard to payment of honorarium to these 
instructors/teachers has to be shared by the Central Government and 
the State Government in the ratio of 60:40 respectively. Therefore, 
once the State has fulfilled its obligation to contribute 40 per cent of 
the finances, it was upon the Central Government to contribute the 
remaining 60 per cent and if the Central Government fails to fulfil its 
obligation, the court could not have directed the State to bear that 
burden. Thus, the High Court has misconstrued various provisions 
of Section 7 of the Act in passing the impugned judgment.
25.	 Shri S. R. Singh, senior counsel appearing for some of the instructors/
teachers in the Civil Appeals arising from S.L.P. Nos.3331-3334/2024 
had submitted that Section 8 of the Act mandates the State 
Government to ensure good quality elementary education (Class 
I-VIII) in accordance with the standards and norms prescribed and, 
therefore, it is incumbent upon the State to engage best of instructors/
teachers and that would only be possible if proper honorarium is 
paid to them. Moreover, Rule 20(3) of the rules framed under the 
Act provides that pay and allowances and other benefits such as 
pension payable to these instructors/teachers shall be at par with the 
instructors/teachers having similar qualification, work and experience. 
Therefore, the State cannot discriminate and pay honorarium to 

336
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
them at a much lower rate than admissible to similarly placed and 
qualified instructors/teachers. The fixation of salary for the instructors/
teachers is within the domain of the State Government and once a 
decision was taken in this regard by the PAB, it had the statutory 
force and was no longer dependent upon the discretion of the Central 
Government or on the availability of the funds, either in the hands 
of the State Government or on account of non-release of funds by 
the Central Government.
26.	 In the light of the above facts and submission advanced on behalf 
of the parties, the central issue in the present appeals is about the 
honorarium payable to the part time contractual instructors/teachers of 
the Upper Primary Schools in the State of Uttar Pradesh and whether 
the fixed honorarium payable to them under the initial contract is 
revisable from time to time.
27.	 Before delving into the merit of the case, it is pertinent to address the 
preliminary objection raised by the State of Uttar Pradesh regarding 
the maintainability of the Writ Petition. The submission on behalf of 
the State of U.P. is that the writ petitions were not maintainable as 
instructors/teachers have not exhausted the remedies available under 
the Act/scheme. In this regard, reliance has been placed upon Section 
24(3) of the Act which provides that grievances of the instructors/
teachers shall be redressed in such manner as may be prescribed. 
28.	 No doubt, the aforesaid provisions make arrangement for a redressal 
of the grievance of the instructors/teachers but the grievances referred 
therein are in context with the default in performance of duties by 
them or in connection with the disciplinary action, if any, taken against 
them. This is evident from the reading of Sub-section (2) of Section 
24 of the Act which provides that a teacher committing default in 
performance of duties shall be liable to the disciplinary action and it is 
in that connection that Sub-section (3) provides for the redressal of the 
grievance of the teacher. The provisions of Section 24 are required to 
be read together and not in isolation. Sub-section (3) of Section 24, as 
such, cannot be read divorced Sub-section (1) and (2) of Section 24. 
29.	 Moreover, as held in Rajasthan State Electricity Board v. Union 
of India4, the existence of an alternative remedy under a statutory 
4	
(2008) 5 SCC 632

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
337
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
scheme does not operate as an absolute bar to the exercise of writ 
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution. This is particularly 
so in cases where the writ petition has already been entertained by 
the Court, pleadings have been completed, and the matter has been 
adjudicated on merits. In such circumstances, relegating the parties 
to an alternative forum would defeat the ends of justice and render 
the prior proceedings redundant.
30.	 The Supreme Court has consistently clarified that the rule of exclusion 
of writ jurisdiction on account of availability of an alternative remedy 
is one of prudence and self-restraint, not of compulsion. This principle 
was authoritatively reiterated in Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd.5 wherein it was held that the High Court, while 
exercising its writ jurisdiction, must weigh the facts and circumstances 
of each case, assess the pros and cons, and then decide whether 
interference is warranted. Thus, where the facts so justify, the 
Court retains full discretion to entertain and decide a writ petition 
notwithstanding the availability of an alternative remedy. Thus, the 
objection to the maintainability is unsustainable and is overruled.
31.	 In order to appreciate the issue at hand it is important to first examine 
the position/status accorded to the teachers in the Indian society.
32.	 In the larger narrative of nation-building, the energy, idealism, and 
strength of the youth are rightly recognised as the driving force 
of progress. Yet, this raw potential requires direction, and it is the 
teacher who shapes it into a constructive and purposeful force. The 
true foundation of a strong nation does not lie merely in the size of 
its young population, but in the character and values of its citizens. 
It is here that the teacher emerges as the most crucial catalyst.
33.	 It has been rightly observed that the real meaning of nation-building 
lies in shaping character and refining personality. While parents 
bear the primary responsibility of nurturing values, teachers play an 
equally vital and decisive role. They engage with young minds during 
their most formative years and, in doing so, profoundly influence 
attitudes, conduct, and ideals. When parents and teachers work 
together to instill discipline, moral values, and social responsibility, 
the foundations of a stable and principled nation are laid.
5	
(2003) 2 SCC 107

338
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
34.	 This role of the teacher is beautifully captured in the verse, 
“रविd रहेेगाा जििKसकेे पीीछेे, वहीी अरुण भेेदेेगाा तम।”
When the sun stands behind a youth, darkness cannot remain before 
them. In this verse, the sun symbolises knowledge, clarity, and truth, 
while darkness represents ignorance and confusion. In this sense, the 
teacher stands in the place of the sun. With a teacher’s guidance, a 
student is never truly lost. The teacher’s wisdom and values remain 
as a constant source of strength and direction, enabling the student 
to overcome ignorance and move towards understanding, just as 
dawn dispels the darkness of night.
35.	 Therefore, if we seek a better future for the nation, we must recognise, 
value and support teachers who are quietly shaping the country’s 
destiny by moulding character, instilling values, and guiding the youth. 
36.	 Culturally, India has always recognized teachers equivalent to God. 
This Indian concept is universally known and is reflected in the 
following couplet: 
“गुुरु ब्रह्माा गुुरु विdष्णुु, गुुरु देेवो महेेश्वरा ।
गुुरु साक्षाात परब्रह्म, तस्मैै श्रीी गुुरुवेे नम: ॥”
This couplet elevates teacher to divine level by recognizing teacher’s 
crucial role in shaping its pupils’ character and life. It recognizes 
teacher’s contribution in imparting knowledge and preserving correct 
values through relentless and continuous guidance. Thus, a teacher 
is a divine channel and not merely an instructor who acts as a 
guiding force in nurturing insight and enlightening thoughts. He is 
a divine trinity.
37.	 In India, while teachers have been given stature equivalent to the 
God, there have been instances where they are placed above God. 
This is reflected from the following couplet:
“गुुरु गोबिं[ंद दोऊ खड़ेे, का केे लाागौंं पांं�य।
बलि�हाारी गुुरु आपनेे, जििKन गोबिं[ंद दि�योो बताय॥”
This verse highlights the supreme importance of teacher. It presents 
a situation where when teacher and God appears in front of you, 
it is always better to bow down to the teacher first then God as 
he is a person who awakens our life and introduces us to God. It 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
339
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
conveys that while God represents truth, it is teachers who help us 
reach the truth, the God. Therefore, in all humility, the Indian culture, 
society and ethos place teachers, if not higher to the God but, at 
least equivalent to them. Teachers command the highest respect in 
society and are revered/worshipful as Gods.
38.	 It is in the above scenario that we have to consider the manner in 
which our primary teachers have to be treated, who are responsible 
for the character building of the generation next i.e. Bharat Bhagya 
Vidhata. They are the ones who build the character of new generation. 
Character building of the citizens is the foundation for the nation 
building. If this foundation is weak, the nation is bound to collapse. 
Therefore, we must accord the highest regard and respect to our 
teachers at all levels, even at the level of the government, especially 
the primary teachers. They have to be compensated for their work 
most suitably. In fact, no honorarium would be enough to compensate 
the services rendered by our teachers.
39.	 The part time contractual instructors/teachers appointed in Primary 
Schools of the State of Uttar Pradesh, in the first place, ceases to 
be contractual teachers as soon as the contract period of eleven 
months initially entered into or the renewed period, if any, comes 
to an end. It is noticed from the counter affidavit that the original 
contracts were last renewed in 2017-18 and in these renewed 
contracts the honorarium agreed upon is Rs.8,470/- per month. There 
is no renewed contract thereafter. The contract having once expired 
and not having been renewed specifically and reduced to writing 
after 2017-18 would not actually be a contract so as to recognize 
the instructors/ teachers so appointed to be contract teachers on 
the expiry of the above contract. They would rather be treated as 
teachers simpliciter after 2017-18.
40.	 There is another reason to treat them as teachers at par with other 
teachers. The part time contractual instructors/teachers appointed in 
Upper Primary Schools possesses the basic educational qualifications 
and eligibility as set out by the National Council for Teachers Education 
which are at par with the norms laid down for appointment of 
regular teachers. In this view of the matter, the part time contractual 
instructors/teachers appointed by the State Government under the 
Scheme are in no way inferior to the regular teachers or the Assistant 
Teachers appointed otherwise under the scheme.

340
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
41.	 Secondly, part time contractual instructors/teachers of the Upper 
Primary School are not even part time teachers, though they are 
described so. It is for the simple reason that their appointment itself 
vide Clause 5 of their service contract stipulates that they are being 
appointed with the condition that they would not directly or indirectly 
take up any part time appointment or whole-time job anywhere else. 
The moment Government prohibits these instructors/teachers from 
taking any part time or whole-time job anywhere else, they should 
de facto be treated as full time teachers. Part time teachers are 
those who teaches part time during the day and do other work in 
the remaining time. However, nothing has been placed on record to 
show that they actually work part time and do not discharge duties 
equivalent to those that are discharged by regular teachers. They 
are instructors/teachers who actually work full time like any other 
teacher and cannot even take up any other work during their spare 
time. Thus, in fact, they are whole time teachers.
42.	 In other words, the nomenclature used to describe the instructors/
teachers as part time contractual teachers is completely deceptive. 
They neither remain contractual teachers after the expiry of the 
contractual period nor they are part time teachers especially when 
no material has been put forth to show that they work only part time 
and do not possess equivalent qualification as that of the regular 
teachers or that they do not discharge equal duties as are expected 
from the regular teachers.
43.	 There is another important facet of the matter which needs to be 
addressed by us. The appointment of these part time contractual 
instructors/teachers, though for a limited period of one year, has 
undisputedly continued for over ten years in a row. The scheme 
adopted by the State Government envisages for appointment of one 
such instructor/teacher for every hundred students; meaning thereby, 
that for every hundred students in a school, one instructor/teacher is 
mandatory. Thus, it flows from abovementioned facts that though posts 
for such teachers have not been specifically created but by virtue of 
their continuous engagement and subsistence of the scheme, they 
have acquired certain degree of permanency and the posts stand 
created or deemed to be created per se automatically. Notably, these 
part-time contractual instructors/teachers were discharging duties 
similar to regular teachers including teaching up to eight periods in 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
341
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
a day, thereby performing the same workload and responsibilities 
as regular teachers. In view of constitutional mandate of providing 
free education up to primary levels, the State Government cannot 
abandon the scheme and render the Upper Primary Education 
meaningless, as it would be in conflict with the Act. Accordingly, the 
nature of work assigned to these instructors/teachers is apparently 
of a permanent nature. The conclusion is, therefore, inevitable that 
the appointments of these instructors/teachers are more or less of 
a permanent nature and against a post which is deemed to have 
been created substantively. 
44.	 The appointment of these instructors/teachers, even if held to be 
contractual, part time or even temporary in nature, there is hardly any 
scope to replace these instructors/teachers by a fresh contractual, 
part time or temporary instructor/teacher inasmuch as these are 
the persons who are not only qualified but have acquired some 
experience of working and are definitely more suitable than the 
freshers. It goes without saying that an ad hoc employee cannot 
be replaced by another ad hoc employee, a temporary employee 
cannot be replaced by another temporary employee, a contractual 
employee cannot be replaced by another contractual employee and 
the guest employee by another guest employee. The incumbents 
working as aforesaid are entitled to preference in comparison to the 
new candidates, unless of course there is anything against them. In 
fact, practice of engaging employees on ad hoc, temporary, part time, 
contractual or as guest ought to be avoided and the Government 
should strictly adhere to proper procedure for regular recruitment. 
45.	 In the instant case, all appointments of the instructors/teachers 
were made by following the procedure prescribed under the 
scheme pursuant to a proper advertisement. In a sense, they 
were all substantively appointed, maybe there was no sanctioned 
post but the sanction of the post is deemed to be there as the 
nature of the work assigned to these instructors/teachers is of a 
permanent nature which in all probabilities is of a continuing nature 
and is not likely to be abandoned or curtailed in any manner. The 
term “substantive appointment” is not so defined but in service 
jurisprudence is considered to mean an appointment, not being an 
ad hoc appointment, on a post made after selection in accordance 
with the rules and in the absence of the rules in accordance with 

342
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the procedure prescribed for under any scheme or the instructions 
of the Government. Therefore, once these instructors/teachers have 
undergone the process of selection under the scheme regardless 
of the fact that there existed a post, their appointments have to be 
treated as substantive in character.
46.	 In the facts and circumstances, the business of calling such instructors/
teachers as ad hoc appointees or temporary appointees or part time 
or contractual appointees is altogether a misnomer and is not at all 
appropriate.
47.	 In Jaggo v. Union of India and Ors.6 this Court observed that it is 
a hard reality that temporary employees, particularly in Government 
institutions often face multifaceted forms of exploitation which include 
misuse of “temporary labels”, “lack of career progression” and “denial 
of basic rights and benefits”. It further observed that employees 
engaged for work which is essentially recurring and integral to 
the functioning of an institution are often labeled as “temporary” 
or “contractual” employees even though their roles mirror those of 
regular employees. Such deceptive description of the employees 
deprives them of their dignity, security and benefits that other regular 
employees are entitled to, despite performing identical duties. These 
employees often find themselves excluded from opportunities for skill 
development, promotions or incremental pay raises, and they remain 
stagnant in their roles. They are deprived of fundamental benefits 
such a pension, provident fund, health insurance and paid leave 
even though they work for decades resulting in social insecurity.
48.	 The question that arises now is as to what should be the appropriate 
honorarium payable to such instructors/teachers. No doubt, they 
were appointed on a fixed honorarium of Rs. 7,000/- per month way 
back in the year 2013-14 but that fixed honorarium was only for a 
period of 11 months or for the renewed period thereafter but was 
not applicable for their extended term on the expiry of contracted 
period. In the wake of the subsequent renewed contract for the period 
2016-17 fixing honorarium @ Rs.8,470/- per month, the question is 
what would be the honorarium payable to them after 2017-18 as 
there is no material on record to establish that any fresh contract 
was executed for the subsequent years. 
6	
2024 SCC Online SC 3826

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
343
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
49.	 At this juncture it would be necessary to advert to yet another 
submission that has been put forth by the State. It is contended 
that the fixation of honorarium of these instructors/teachers is a 
policy decision wherein Court has no role to play. This cannot be 
accepted in the facts and circumstances of the case. The fixation of 
honorarium to the instructors/teachers may be a policy decision but 
it cannot be exercised in an arbitrary manner so as to subject the 
instructors/teachers to ‘Begar’. The honorarium has to be fixed in 
consonance with the duties assigned to these instructors/teachers 
depending upon their stature. Therefore, any policy decision of the 
Government permanently fixing the honorarium of the instructors/
teachers for all times to come, cannot be justified and approved of 
as periodical revision depending upon the price rise, cost of living 
and other host of factors. It is always permissible to revise the 
honorarium once fixed, not only in the case of instructors/teachers 
but also in the employment of workers/labourers.
50.	 It is admitted on record that the State Government in the year 2016-17 
had submitted a proposal to pay Rs. 15,000/- per month as honorarium 
to them; meaning thereby, that the State Government acknowledges 
that the honorarium initially fixed for these instructors/teachers is 
insufficient and has to be increased. This realization probably may 
be for the reason that in the year 2016-17 not even the labourers/
unskilled workers were being paid such low honorarium. The minimum 
wages Act provided for a minimum wage of Rs.7,214/- per month in 
2016-17 to the daily unskilled workers. Therefore, the Government 
might have thought that such instructors/teachers cannot be paid 
honorarium at a lower rate than the workers. Despite the above 
recommendations, the PAB approved and sanctioned honorarium 
to them at the rate of Rs. 8,470/- per month and that too for the 
year 2016-17 only.
51.	 In the subsequent year, a fresh proposal was submitted by the State 
Government to the PAB to pay Rs. 17,000/- per month as honorarium 
to these instructors/teachers. It was also approved by the PAB. 
Even the Additional Chief Secretary (Basic Education), Government 
of Uttar Pradesh acknowledged vide Letter dated 02.06.2017 
that the Government has accepted the proposal for payment of 
Rs. 17,000/- per month as honorarium to these instructors/teachers. 
However, despite such an acceptance, the Executive Committee 

344
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the Shiksha Pariyojna Parishad fixed the honorarium for these 
instructors/teachers at the rate of Rs. 9,800/- per month for the year 
2017-18 only. However, they were not even paid the honorarium of 
Rs. 9,800/- per month fixed and determined, what to say about the 
proposed and accepted honorarium of Rs. 17,000/- per month. 
52.	 It is admitted on record that the honorarium payable to these 
instructors/teachers which was fixed at Rs. 7,000/- per month in the 
year 2013-14 was enhanced to Rs. 8,470/- per month in the year 
2016-17 and then to Rs. 9,800/- per month in the year 2017-18 but 
even then, they were never paid Rs.9,800/- per month. This may be 
probably due to the renewed contract for the year 2017-18 wherein 
these instructors/teachers agreed for Rs.8,470/- per month but 
this renewed contract also ended and there was no fresh contract. 
Thus, the honorarium fixed in the initial contract stood revised and 
substituted by Rs.8,470/- per month rather by Rs. 9,800/- per month 
in the next year and could not have been reduced thereafter in the 
absence of any contract to the contrary. It must be borne in mind that 
there was no stipulation under the contract that the honorarium once 
fixed, cannot be revised or refixed or enhanced or once revised could 
be reduced. In this situation, the State Government was not justified 
in reducing the honorarium payable to these instructors/teachers from 
the year 2019-20 onwards again to Rs. 7,000/- per month after it was 
enhanced to Rs.8,470/- for the year 2016-17 and to Rs. 9,800/- per 
month in the year 2017-18. The State Government cannot take away 
the benefit which is once extended to these instructors/teachers in 
a unilateral way without following the principles of natural justice.
53.	 The above facts and circumstances clearly indicate that the State 
Government was conscious of the fact that the honorarium of these 
instructors/teachers initially fixed under the contract is open to change 
and is revisable, if not on year-to-year basis but periodically. The 
honorarium cannot remain stagnant for all times to come. 
54.	 Article 23 of the Constitution provides with a general prohibition 
against “traffic in human beings, beggar and other similar forms 
of forced labour”. In the landmark case of People’s Union For 
Democratic Rights v. Union of India7, the Supreme Court has 
7	
(1982) 3 SCC 235

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
345
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
adopted an expansive interpretation of Article 23 of the Constitution. 
The court explained the meaning of “Forced labour” to encompass 
any work or service rendered unwillingly as a result of force or 
compulsion. It held that “force” under Article 23 of the Constitution not 
only includes physical or legal force but also economic compulsion 
due to which the individual is left with no other alternative but to 
accept renumeration less than the minimum wages. It was held that 
when a person is rendering service or doing labour at a meagre 
amount less than the minimum wages, then he is not voluntarily 
working, he is being forced by his economic hardship to accept 
the pay. The case also covers contractual workers who may have 
formally agreed to such terms, as such agreements are often the 
product of uneven bargaining power and do not represent free and 
voluntary consent in a substantive sense. Thus, this Article takes a 
hit at every form of forced labour, whether it is a direct case of forced 
labour or case of forced labour hidden under the guise of voluntary 
work or contractual work. Any unfair practice fixing remuneration of 
these instructors/teachers permanently as Rs. 7,000/- per month 
or Rs. Rs. 8,470/- per month for all times is a kind of forced labour 
amounting to ‘Begar’ which is strictly prohibited under Article 23 of 
the Constitution.
55.	 In the present case, the further unilateral reduction of the already 
low renumeration has placed these part time instructors/teachers 
in place of economic vulnerability. These instructors’/teachers’ 
position is worsened by Clause 5 of their employment contract, 
which explicitly prohibits them from taking up any other employment, 
part-time or whole-time. This clause, operating in tandem with the 
State’s unilateral wage reduction, creates a coercive cage. The 
instructors/teachers are left with no alternative, they cannot seek 
supplementary income elsewhere due to the contractual bar, and 
they cannot refuse the reduced wages due to economic necessity. 
This complete deprivation of choice is the essence of the “force” 
contemplated in the abovementioned case. 
56.	 Consequently, the State’s actions has created a condition of economic 
coercion that is inconsistent with the constitutional safeguards against 
forced labour. The State’s action of withdrawing a legitimately enhanced 
wage and then allowing honorarium to remain artificially depressed 
would, in substance, be inconsistent with the spirit of Article 23 of 
the Constitution which prohibits all forms of forced labour. The State, 

346
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
under the guise of contractual management or financial constraint, 
cannot compel labours/teachers to such coercive circumstances.
57.	 In view of the above discussion, one thing is very clear that the 
honorarium fixed for these instructors/teachers under the contract 
cannot remain stagnant and is revisable suitably on periodical 
basis and that if once revised and increased cannot be reduced for 
subsequent periods. 
58.	 Now the issue is the manner and the basis on which the honorarium 
payable to these instructors/teachers has to be revised and fixed.
59.	 The Samagra Shiksha Scheme subsumed the earlier Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan came into being in the year 2018. It is a centrally sponsored 
scheme which promotes primary education at the State/Union Territory 
level. It provides for the fund sharing pattern in the following manner 
inter se the Union and the State or Union Territory:
(i)	
For eight North-Eastern States and three Himalayan States, in 
the ratio of 90:10;
(ii)	
For all other States and Union Territories, in the ratio of 60:40; 
and
(iii)	 For Union Territories without legislature, it is 100% by the Union.
60.	 The aforesaid scheme aims for providing additional support to the 
States and the Union Territories to improve the quality of primary 
education. 
61.	 The Scheme is implemented at the national level by Governing 
Council headed by the Minister of Education and then there is a 
Project Approval Board at the national level which is headed by the 
Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy. It is the 
primary function of the PAB to approve the annual work plan and 
budget of States and Union Territories. It has full financial powers 
to approve plans and sanction the budgets for the implementation 
of the scheme. No other authority has any say in the financial 
matters and that connected with the budget of the scheme. The 
aforesaid powers and functions of the PAB and that it is a national 
level administrative body is duly spelled out in Chapters 14.2.2 and 
14.2.4 of the scheme.
62.	 At the State level, there is a Governing Council headed by the Chief 
Minister/State Education Minister and then there is an Executive 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
347
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
Committee headed by the Chief Secretary/Commissioner/Education 
Secretary of the State/Union Territory. The Governing Council is 
vested with the power to frame necessary policies and to facilitate 
Center-State Coordination, whereas, the administrative powers 
vests with the Executive Committee. However, none of the above 
two bodies are vested with any financial powers or the power to 
sanction budget. Therefore, the power to sanction budget remains 
in the exclusive domain of PAB. It means that under the scheme, it 
is only the PAB who has the authority to sanction budget and inter 
alia to even fix honorarium of the instructors/teachers.
63.	 The Act is completely silent with regard to the financial matters 
and the fixation of honorarium admissible to the instructors/
teachers appointed under the scheme. However, Section 24 of 
the Act provides for the duties of the teachers appointed under the 
scheme and Section 27 inter alia lays down that no teacher shall 
be deployed for any non-educational purpose other than the work 
in connection with the decennial population census, disaster relief 
duties or duties relating to elections to the local authority or the 
State Legislature or the Parliament, as the case may be. In other 
words, teachers under the scheme can be deployed in certain 
non-educational work also. 
64.	 It is only Rule 20 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Rules, 2010 framed under the Act which provides for the 
salary, allowances and conditions of the service of teachers appointed 
under the scheme. It inter alia vide sub-rule 20 (3) provides that the 
scales of pay and allowance, medical facilities, pension/gratuity/
provident fund and other prescribed benefits of teachers shall be at 
par for similar qualification, work and experience of other teachers. 
It necessarily means that the instructors/teachers appointed under 
the scheme for the benefit of the primary education under the Act 
have been placed at par with other instructors/teachers and that 
apart from pay, they are entitled to allowances, medical facilities, 
pension/gratuity/provident fund and similar benefits. 
65.	 In view of the foregoing provisions and the scheme, it is evident 
that the instructors/teachers appointed under the scheme have to 
be at par with other instructors/teachers and they have to perform 
not only the academic duties but certain other non-educational 
duties as well. They are entitled to honorarium at par with the other 

348
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
instructors/teachers. However, under the facts and circumstances 
of the case, the instructors/teachers appointed under the scheme 
described as part time contractual instructors/teachers, are being 
paid fixed honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month only, which is even 
lesser than the minimum wages admissible to the workers/labourers. 
Accordingly, as mentioned earlier, the honorarium payable to these 
instructors/teachers needs to be revised periodically. This periodic 
revision has to be done by none other than PAB and its decision 
is to be treated as final and binding as no other authority or body 
under the Act or the scheme has any power to sit over its decision 
and to take a contrary view. In the case at hand, the honorarium 
initially fixed at Rs.7,000/- per month was revised to Rs.8,470/- and 
thereafter, the PAB had opined and fixed it at Rs.9,800/- per month 
for the year 2017-18. Once such a decision had been taken, it was 
no one’s business to intervene and to reduce the honorarium and 
pay either Rs.8,470/- or Rs.7,000/- per month to these instructors/
teachers. 
66.	 It may also be noted that PAB had determined the honorarium 
of Rs.17,000/- per month for the year 2017-18 but this was not 
implemented. Therefore, in all earnest, the instructors/teachers 
appointed under the scheme became entitled for payment of 
honorarium at the rate of Rs.17,000/- per month for the year 2017-
18 and thereafter, till it is suitably revised by the PAB. There is 
nothing on record to demonstrate that any revision of honorarium 
has taken place after 2017-18 by the PAB but even then that the 
honorarium was lowered to the initial one that is Rs.7,000/- per month. 
Therefore, the payment of honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month to 
the instructors/teachers appointed under the scheme from the year 
2018-19 onwards is completely illegal, arbitrary and unjustified in 
the facts and circumstances of the case. 
67.	 In the light of the above discussion, it is most appropriate for us to 
direct for the payment of honorarium at the rate of Rs.17,000/- per 
month to all instructors/teachers appointed under the scheme from 
the year 2017-18 onwards till the same is revised by the appropriate 
authority i.e., PAB and further that the PAB shall periodically revise 
the honorarium fixed for these instructors/teachers, if not annually 
but once in three years. 
68.	 Though, Section 7 of the Act provides for sharing of financial 
responsibilities between the State/Union Territories and the Central 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
349
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
Government and casts a liability upon both the Governments to share 
the financial burden in such percentage as may be determined from 
time to time by the Central Government in consultation with the State 
Government. Nonetheless, Section 7 (5) of the Act, in unequivocal 
terms, saddles the State Government with the responsibility to provide 
funds for the implementation of the provisions of the Act. The above 
Sub-section (5) of Section 7 of the Act reads as under :-
“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(4), the State Government shall, taking into consideration 
the sums provided by the Central Government to a State 
Government under sub-section (3), and its other resources, 
be responsible to provide funds for implementation of the 
provisions of the Act.”
69.	 A simple reading of the aforesaid provision reveals that the State 
Government shall take into account not only the sums provided 
by the Central Government to the State Government but also its 
other resources and shall be responsible to provide funds for the 
implementation of the provisions of the Act. Therefore, an onerous 
duty has been cast upon the State Government to implement the 
provisions of the Act vis-à-vis the payment of honorarium to the 
instructors/teachers. Therefore, in all earnest, it is primary duty of 
the State Government to pay honorarium to the instructors/teachers 
appointed under the Act or the scheme formulated thereunder. In 
the event, the Central Government fails to contribute its share of 
finances, the State Government is free to recover it from the Central 
Government but cannot deny payment to instructors/teachers. The 
principle of “pay and recover” as such would be attracted and would 
be applicable.
70.	 On the basis of the above discussion, we conclude as under :-
i)	
The appointment of the part time or contractual instructors/
teachers in fact no longer remains contractual in nature once 
the contract period of eleven months for which they were initially 
appointed or the extended contract period stood expired;
ii)	
They were not even part time instructors/teachers as they were 
specifically prohibited for taking any job or part time employment 
elsewhere during their spare time;

350
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
iii)	
In fact, these instructors/teachers having continued continuously 
for over ten years in a row are deemed to be employed 
permanently against deemed substantive posts, as with the 
passage of time and keeping in mind the continuity of the work, 
such posts stand automatically created;
iv)	
The PAB is the sole central authority to manage budget and 
finances under the Act and the scheme and to fix honorarium 
for the instructors/teachers appointed thereunder. No other 
authority has any say in the matter concerning finance and 
budget consequently in the fixation of honorarium;
v)	
The PAB having once approved the proposal for fixing 
Rs.17,000/- per month as honorarium to these instructors/
teachers, no authority can sit over such a decision and pass 
orders contrary to it;
vi)	
The initial burden to pay honorarium to the instructors/teachers 
is upon the State Government who is free to recover the 
contribution of the Central Government from the Union of India 
on the principle of “pay & recover”;
vii)	 The honorarium payable to these instructors/teachers cannot 
be permitted to remain stagnant and the same is revisable 
periodically at least once in three years by the PAB or any 
other authority as may be determined by the Central 
Government/State Government under the scheme or the 
modified scheme; 
viii)	 Any action of the State/Union Government to employ instructors/
teachers on a fixed honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month as was 
initially fixed in 2013-14 amounts to ‘Begar’ and unfair practice 
which is violative of Article 23 of the Constitution;
ix)	
The PAB having fixed honorarium to these instructors/teachers 
at the rate of Rs.17,000/- per month with effect from the year 
2017-18, the State Government/Central Government is not 
justified in paying them at a lesser rate of either Rs.8,470/- or 
Rs.9,800/- or at the basic rate of Rs.7,000/- per month.
71.	 In view of the above discussion, the question formulated in paragraph 
14 above is answered by holding that part time contractual instructors/

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
351
U.P. Junior High School Council Instructor Welfare Association v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
teachers appointed in the Upper Primary School in the State of U.P. 
are entitled to revision of their honorarium of Rs.7,000/- per month 
which was initially fixed for the contract period of eleven months in 
the year 2013 and that the said revision has to take place, if not 
annually then periodically as per the discretion of the PAB. Since the 
PAB for the year 2017-18 had determined the said honorarium to 
be Rs.17,000/- per month, all instructors/teachers appointed under 
the scheme are entitled for the payment of the same at the above 
rate of Rs.17,000/- per month with effect from 2017-18 till further 
revision takes place.
72.	 Thus, all these instructors/teachers are entitled to receive honorarium 
at the rate of Rs.17,000/- per month with effect from 2017-18. The 
State Government shall start paying honorarium to them at the rate 
of Rs. 17,000/- per month w.e.f. 01.04.2026 and the arrears of which 
shall be paid to them by the State Government within a period of 
six months from today. The State Government may recover the 
contribution of the Central Government from the Union of India.
73.	 Accordingly, the Civil Appeals arising out of S.L.P (C) No.9459 of 
2023 and S.L.P. (C) Nos.3331-3334 of 2024 filed by the Welfare 
Association and teachers respectively are allowed whereas the Civil 
Appeals arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos. 1744-1749 of 2026 filed by 
the State of U.P. & Ors. are dismissed in the above terms. 
Result of the case: Civil Appeals arising out of S.L.P (C) No.9459 
of 2023 and S.L.P. (C) Nos.3331-3334 of 
2024 filed by the Welfare Association and 
teachers respectively are allowed whereas 
the Civil Appeals arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos. 
1744- 1749 of 2026 filed by the State of U.P. & 
Ors. are dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
