[2026] 2 S.C.R. 406 : 2026 INSC 130
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through 
its Managing Director, Naveen Singh
v.
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of 
Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
(Criminal Appeal No. 729 of 2026)
06 February 2026
[M.M. Sundresh* and Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
In the instant case, this Court is concerned with the decision-making 
process adopted by the Special Court. Instead of deferring the 
application filed u/s.8(7) of the Prevention of Money-Laundering 
Act, 2002 (PMLA), and awaiting the adjudication by the Appellate 
Tribunal u/s.26 of the PMLA, the Special Court has allowed the 
said application.
Headnotes†
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 – ss.8(7) and s.8(8):
Held: Section 8(7) and Section 8(8) of the PMLA are stand-alone 
provisions. [Para 52]
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 – s.8(7) – When 
attracted:
Held: s.8(7) of the PMLA gets attracted only in case of a contingency 
and an application under the said provision can be decided by 
the Special Court only once the confirmation order attains finality. 
[Para 52]
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 – ss.8(3) and 
8(7) – Import of the expression “material before it” occurring 
in s.8(7) of the PMLA:
Held: The expression “material before it” occurring in s.8(7) of the 
PMLA has a limited import to the extent of showing the contingency 
and the entitlement to possession as regards the Director or any 
* Author

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
407
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
third party – In case of a party who has suffered an adverse order 
u/s.8(3) of the PMLA, relief u/s.8(7) of the PMLA can be sought 
for, provided there is new material that was not placed before or 
considered by the Adjudicating Authority u/s.8(3) of the PMLA, or 
by the higher forums, if so challenged. [Para 52]
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 – Second proviso 
to s.8(8) – Prevention of Money-laundering (Restoration of 
Confiscated Property) Rules, 2016 – rr.2(b) and 3A – When 
can an application under the second proviso to s.8(8) of the 
PMLA be filed:
Held: An application under the second proviso to s.8(8) of the PMLA 
can only be filed subject to satisfying the essential conditions laid 
down by Rules 2(b) and 3A of the 2016 Rules. [Para 52]
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002 – ss.5(1), 8(3), 8(7), 
8(8), 26 – Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 – s.13(2) r/w. 
s.13(1)(d) – An FIR was registered for the various offences 
punishable under the IPC along with s.13(2) r/w. s.13(1)(d) of 
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (predicate offence) – 
A Provisional Attachment Order (PAO) was passed by the 
respondent, u/s.5(1) of the PMLA, on 17.12.2017, attaching two 
pieces of land purchased by the appellant in the years 2012 
and 2014, in lieu of the amount allegedly received fraudulently 
by the firm – The Adjudicating Authority passed a confirmation 
order u/s.8(3) of the PMLA – Aggrieved, an appeal was filed 
by the appellant u/s.26 of the PMLA – In the meantime, a 
Prosecution Complaint was filed by the respondent u/s.45 
of the PMLA – Charges were framed by the Special Court – 
Respondent filed application invoking s.8(7) of the PMLA – 
Thereafter, appellant filed an application invoking s.8(8) of the 
PMLA – The Special Court considered both the applications 
together, notwithstanding the pendency of the appeal filed 
u/s.26 of the PMLA – The Special Court allowed application 
u/s.8(7) of the PMLA and dismissed application u/s.8(8) of 
PMLA – Resultantly, the confiscation of the attached properties, 
as sought by the respondent, was ordered – The order passed 
by the Special Court allowing the application u/s.8(7) of the 
PMLA, was confirmed by the High Court – Correctness:

408
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: Admittedly, the appellant company, having suffered an order 
u/s.8(3) of the PMLA, had preferred an appeal u/s.26 of the PMLA 
which was pending on the file of the Appellate Tribunal even at the 
time of filing of the applications u/ss.8(7) and 8(8) of the PMLA – 
The fact that the said appeal was pending before the Appellate 
Tribunal, for want of coram, is not in dispute – Once an order 
under s.8(3) of the PMLA is challenged before a higher forum, a 
deemed embargo operates on the conclusion of the proceedings 
u/s.8(7) of the PMLA – Hence, the Special Court cannot go into 
the issues which the higher forums have been entrusted with – 
When an appeal is provided for under the statute, it gives a vested 
right to any aggrieved person to exhaust the same – Instead of 
deferring the application filed u/s.8(7) of the PMLA, and awaiting 
the adjudication by the Appellate Tribunal u/s.26 of the PMLA, the 
Special Court has allowed the said application, for which exhaustive 
reasons have been given independently on merits – The Special 
Court has, in effect, rendered the appeal u/s.26 of the PMLA 
infructuous – The said action at the instance of the Special Court 
is totally impermissible in law – Thus, the order passed by the 
Special Court allowing the application u/s.8(7) of the PMLA, as 
confirmed by the High Court in the impugned order is set aside. 
[Paras 45, 46, 50]
Case Law Cited
Vijay Madanlal Chaudhary and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. 
[2022] 6 SCR 382 : (2023) 12 SCC 1 – relied on.
Attorney General for India v. Amratlal Prajivandas [1994] Supp. 
1 SCR 1 : (1994) 5 SCC 54; Raman Tech. & Process Engg. 
Co. v. Solanki Traders [2007] 12 SCR 409 : (2008) 2 SCC 302 – 
referred to.
Directorate of Enforcement of Delhi v. Axis Bank & Ors., 2019 
SCC Online Del 7854 – referred to.
List of Acts
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002; Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988; Penal Code, 1860; Prevention of Money-
laundering (Restoration of Confiscated Property) Rules, 2016; 
Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of 
Property) Act, 1976.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
409
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
List of Keywords
Proceeds of crime; Section 8(3) of Prevention of Money-Laundering 
Act, 2002; Section 8(7) Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 
2002; Section 8(8) of Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 
2002; Doctrine of Merger; Finality of Attachment; Third-Party 
Claimant; Confirmation order; Confiscation of properties; Money-
laundering; Restoration of properties; Section 35 of Prevention of 
Money-Laundering Act, 2002; Section 26 of Prevention of Money-
Laundering Act, 2002; Procedure and Powers of Appellate Tribunal; 
Entitlement to possession; ‘Materials before it’ occurring in s.8(7) 
of Preventive of Money-Laundering Act, 2002.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
729 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 27.02.2023 of the High Court 
of Jharkhand at Ranchi in CRMP No. 3608 of 2022
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ajay Vikram Singh, Anshuman Sinha, Vijay Kumar Pandey, Vinay 
Prakash, Ms. Pragya Sharma, Udayan Sinha, Prakhar Prakash, 
Hemant Mour.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Zoheb Hussain, Annam Venkatesh, Arkaj Kumar, Ms. Sairica S 
Raju, Arvind Kumar Sharma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
M.M. Sundresh, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
An interesting question of law has arisen in this appeal, on the 
interpretation of Section 8 of the Prevention of Money-Laundering 
Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the “PMLA”).
3.	
We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned 
counsel for the respondent - Union of India. We have also perused 
the written submissions and the documents filed by both sides, in 
respect of their contentions.

410
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
BRIEF FACTS
4.	
We are only recording brief facts, as the issues relating thereto are 
not required to be examined for deciding the present appeal.
5.	
A partnership firm, by the name M/s. Nav Nirman Builders (hereinafter 
referred to as the “firm”) was constituted on 01.04.1993 with 
Dharamveer Bhadoria (since deceased) as its Managing Partner. 
After more than a decade from its constitution, the appellant company 
was incorporated with the earlier partners of the firm, including 
Dharamveer Bhadoria who was made its Managing Director. The 
firm secured a work order from the Executive Engineer (RCD), 
Chaibasa, on 23.02.2007. Upon completion of the work, a payment 
of approximately Rs. 79,11,559/- was made to the firm.
6.	
Two years thereafter, a First Information Report (FIR) was registered 
for the offences punishable under Sections 120B, 420, 467, 468, and 
471 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 along with Sections 13(2) read 
with 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter 
referred to as the “predicate offence”), against the Executive 
Engineer, the firm, and unknown others. 
7.	
The sum and substance of the allegations in the FIR dated 22.10.2009 
and the consequential charge sheet dated 03.12.2010 is that the 
firm, despite being required to procure bitumen from oil companies 
of the Government of India, under the terms and conditions of 
the work order, did not do so, and the accused - public servants 
fraudulently cleared the bills of the firm and facilitated their payment. 
To cover up the said act, the firm submitted 37 invoices, claiming to 
have procured bitumen from Indian Oil Corporation Limited Depot, 
Tatanagar, of which 6 were forged and fabricated, and the remaining 
pertained to some other work.
8.	
Based upon the materials revealed during the investigation of the 
predicate offence, proceedings were initiated under the PMLA, on 
13.03.2012, against the firm and Dharamveer Bhadoria. It is pertinent 
to note that the appellant was not arrayed as an accused in these 
proceedings. Perhaps, taking a wind of the proceedings initiated 
under the PMLA, the appellant company underwent a reconstitution 
on 08.06.2015. 
9.	
A Provisional Attachment Order (PAO) was passed by the respondent, 
under Section 5(1) of the PMLA, on 17.12.2017, attaching two pieces 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
411
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
of land purchased by the appellant in the years 2012 and 2014, in lieu 
of the amount allegedly received fraudulently by the firm. Thereafter, 
the respondent filed Original Complaint No. 760/2017 before the 
Adjudicating Authority, seeking confirmation of the PAO. Accordingly, 
proceedings were initiated under Section 8(1) of the PMLA. 
10.	 An impleadment application was filed by the appellant in the aforesaid 
proceedings, since properties purchased by it were provisionally 
attached. The said application was allowed, arraying the appellant as 
Defendant No. 8. After hearing all the parties, including the appellant, 
the Adjudicating Authority passed a confirmation order under Section 
8(3) of the PMLA. Aggrieved, an appeal was filed by the appellant 
under Section 26 of the PMLA before the Appellate Tribunal, in which 
an order of status quo dated 12.07.2018 was passed. 
11.	 In the meantime, a Prosecution Complaint was filed by the respondent 
under Section 45 of the PMLA, on 31.03.2018, against Dharamveer 
Bhadoria and the firm. The sum and substance of the said complaint 
is that the accused persons have utilised the proceeds of crime in 
the purchase of immovable properties in the name of the appellant. 
It is precisely on this ground that the Adjudicating Authority had 
confirmed the PAO. 
12.	 Charges were framed by the Special Court on 17.11.2018, against 
Dharamveer Bhadoria and the firm. On account of his death, on 
02.05.2021, the proceedings against him, in both the predicate 
offence and the one under PMLA, were dropped. In view of the 
above, the respondent filed an application invoking Section 8(7) 
of the PMLA. Nearly two months thereafter, the appellant filed an 
application invoking Section 8(8) of the PMLA, inter alia, contending 
that the properties attached are its own.
13.	 The Special Court considered both the applications together, 
notwithstanding the pendency of the appeal filed under Section 
26 of the PMLA, and allowed the application filed under Section 
8(7) of the PMLA, on merits. Consequently, the application filed 
by the appellant under Section 8(8) of the PMLA was dismissed. 
Resultantly, the confiscation of the attached properties, as sought 
by the respondent, was ordered. While doing so, the Special Court 
was also pleased to hold that the proceedings initiated against the 
accused firm under the PMLA are liable to be dropped. The challenge 
made by the appellant before the High Court under Section 482 of the 

412
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to the order of confiscation under 
Section 8(7) of the PMLA also met with the same fate. Aggrieved, 
the present appeal has been filed.
14.	 At this juncture, we may note that the appeal filed by the appellant 
under Section 26 of the PMLA has been dismissed as infructuous, 
on 23.08.2023, during the pendency of the present appeal.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT 
15.	 Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the 
attached properties belong to the appellant company which is an 
independent entity and has not been arraigned as an accused. Neither 
the Special Court nor the High Court have gone into the merits of 
the application filed by the appellant under Section 8(8) of the PMLA. 
The fact that the appeal against the confirmation order passed by the 
Adjudicating Authority under Section 8(3) of the PMLA was pending 
before the Appellate Tribunal for a long time due to want of coram, 
was brought to the notice of the Special Court. Yet, the Special Court 
decided the application under Section 8(7) of the PMLA on merits. 
The appellant cannot be made to suffer for the same. Even as per 
the case of the respondent, the properties attached are not the 
proceeds of crime, and are only alternate property in value thereof. 
Despite the sources and the bank trail for the purchase of the said 
properties having been clearly furnished, the Special Court has not 
engaged with it in substance. The principle of ‘lifting the corporate 
veil’ cannot be used unilaterally against the appellant’s properties. 
Accordingly, the learned counsel submitted that the impugned order 
passed by the High Court requires interference. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENT
16.	 The facts as noted by the Special Court and the High Court would 
reveal that the proceeds of crime to the tune of Rs. 79,11,559/-, 
were first placed in the banking system by the firm and, thereafter, 
layered and laundered by investing in immovable properties on 
behalf of the appellant which shared the same name and address 
as that of the firm. Dharamveer Bhadoria suppressed material facts, 
including the existence of the appellant company and his role in the 
same. It was discovered during the course of investigation that the 
entire share capital of the appellant was owned and controlled by the 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
413
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
partners of the firm, who were either the Managing Director, Director, 
or Shareholder in the appellant company. The reconstitution of the 
appellant has been done after the initiation of proceedings under 
the PMLA and, thus, cannot come to its rescue. The facts make it 
clear that the appellant is a mere frontal and sham entity created 
to divert the money obtained by fraudulent means. The subject 
properties, having been purchased through the proceeds of crime, 
were attached and, thereafter, confiscated, being the ‘value thereof’ 
of the proceeds of crime. Section 2(1)(u) of the PMLA is expansive 
enough to deal with such a situation, as has been discussed in 
Vijay Madanlal Chaudhary and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors., 
(2023) 12 SCC 1. 
17.	 The pendency of the appeal preferred by the appellant before the 
Appellate Tribunal under Section 26 of the PMLA would not come in 
the way of deciding the application under Section 8(7) of the PMLA. 
Reliance is placed on the decision of the Delhi High Court in Deputy 
Director, Directorate of Enforcement of Delhi v. Axis Bank & Ors. 
2019 SCC Online Del 7854 in this regard. In any case, the aforesaid 
appeal has been dismissed, though subsequently. It is further 
submitted that the appellant has failed to discharge the burden of 
proof under Section 24 of the PMLA, as it failed to show the legitimate 
source for purchasing the attached properties. It is well-settled that 
the Courts are empowered to pierce the corporate veil and find out 
the truth if criminal offences are sought to be committed under the 
garb of corporate personality. Thus, the impugned order passed by 
the High Court confirming the order passed by the Special Court 
under Section 8(7) of the PMLA does not warrant any interference. 
LEGAL DISCUSSION 
18.	 We now proceed to discuss the relevant statutory provisions. 
Section 2(1)(u) of the PMLA
“2. Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires,—
xxx
xxx
xxx
(u) “proceeds of crime” means any property derived 
or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person as 

414
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled 
offence or the value of any such property or where 
such property is taken or held outside the country, 
then the property equivalent in value held within the 
country or abroad;
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
clarified that “proceeds of crime” include property not only 
derived or obtained from the scheduled offence but also 
any property which may directly or indirectly be derived 
or obtained as a result of any criminal activity relatable to 
the scheduled offence;”
(emphasis supplied)
19.	 The definition of “proceeds of crime” under Section 2(1)(u) of the 
PMLA is wide enough to include a property which is equivalent in 
value to the property that is directly or indirectly obtained from a 
criminal activity relating to the scheduled offence. Thus, such a 
property can also be attached if the proceeds of crime, as such, are 
not otherwise available. Section 2(1)(u) of the PMLA, despite being 
a definition clause, indicates the very objective of the enactment to 
secure proceeds of crime in any form. The scope and applicability 
of this provision have been succinctly dealt with by this Court, in the 
case of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), in the following manner:
“105. The other relevant definition is “proceeds of crime” in 
Section 2(1)(u) of the 2002 Act. This definition is common to 
all actions under the Act, namely, attachment, adjudication 
and confiscation being civil in nature as well as prosecution 
or criminal action. The original provision prior to amendment 
vide the Finance Act, 2015 and Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019, 
took within its sweep any property mentioned in Section 
2(1)(v) PMLA derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by 
any person “as a result of” criminal activity “relating to” a 
scheduled offence mentioned in Section 2(1)(y) read with 
Schedule to the Act or the value of any such property. Vide 
the Finance Act, 2015, it further included such property 
(being proceeds of crime) which is taken or held outside the 
country, then the property equivalent in value held within the 
country and by further amendment vide Act 13 of 2018, it 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
415
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
also added property which is abroad. By further amendment 
vide Finance (No. 2) Act, 2019, Explanation has been 
added which is obviously a clarificatory amendment. That is 
evident from the plain language of the inserted Explanation 
itself. The fact that it also includes any property which 
may, directly or indirectly, be derived as a result of 
any criminal activity relatable to scheduled offence 
does not transcend beyond the original provision. 
In that, the word “relating to” (associated with/has 
to do with) used in the main provision is a present 
participle of word “relate” and the word “relatable” is 
only an adjective. The thrust of the original provision 
itself is to indicate that any property is derived or 
obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result of criminal 
activity concerning the scheduled offence, the same 
be regarded as proceeds of crime. In other words, 
property in whatever form mentioned in Section 2(1)
(v), is or can be linked to criminal activity relating to 
or relatable to scheduled offence, must be regarded as 
proceeds of crime for the purpose of the 2002 Act. It 
must follow that the Explanation inserted in 2019 is merely 
clarificatory and restatement of the position emerging from 
the principal provision [i.e. Section 2(1)(u).
106. The “proceeds of crime” being the core of 
the ingredients constituting the offence of money 
laundering, that expression needs to be construed 
strictly. In that, all properties recovered or attached 
by the investigating agency in connection with the 
criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence under 
the general law cannot be regarded as proceeds of 
crime. There may be cases where the property involved 
in the commission of scheduled offence attached by 
the investigating agency dealing with that offence, 
cannot be wholly or partly regarded as proceeds of 
crime within the meaning of Section 2(1)(u) of the 2002 
Act — so long as the whole or some portion of the 
property has been derived or obtained by any person 
“as a result of” criminal activity relating to the stated 
scheduled offence. To be proceeds of crime, therefore, 

416
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the property must be derived or obtained, directly or 
indirectly, “as a result of” criminal activity relating to 
a scheduled offence. To put it differently, the vehicle used 
in commission of scheduled offence may be attached as 
property in the case (crime) concerned, it may still not 
be proceeds of crime within the meaning of Section 2(1)
(u) of the 2002 Act. Similarly, possession of unaccounted 
property acquired by legal means may be actionable for 
tax violation and yet, will not be regarded as proceeds 
of crime unless the tax legislation concerned prescribes 
such violation as an offence and such offence is included 
in the Schedule to the 2002 Act. For being regarded as 
proceeds of crime, the property associated with the 
scheduled offence must have been derived or obtained 
by a person “as a result of” criminal activity relating to 
the scheduled offence concerned. This distinction must 
be borne in mind while reckoning any property referred 
to in the scheduled offence as proceeds of crime for the 
purpose of the 2002 Act. Dealing with proceeds of crime 
by way of any process or activity constitutes offence of 
money laundering under Section 3 PMLA.
107. Be it noted that the definition clause includes 
any property derived or obtained “indirectly” as well. 
This would include property derived or obtained from 
the sale proceeds or in a given case in lieu of or in 
exchange of the “property” which had been directly 
derived or obtained as a result of criminal activity 
relating to a scheduled offence. In the context of the 
Explanation added in 2019 to the definition of the 
expression “proceeds of crime”, it would inevitably 
include other property which may not have been 
derived or obtained as a result of any criminal activity 
relatable to the scheduled offence. As noticed from the 
definition, it essentially refers to “any property” including 
abroad derived or obtained directly or indirectly. The 
Explanation added in 2019 in no way travels beyond that 
intent of tracking and reaching up to the property derived or 
obtained directly or indirectly as a result of criminal activity 
relating to a scheduled offence. Therefore, the Explanation 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
417
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
is in the nature of clarification and not to increase the width 
of the main definition of “proceeds of crime”. The definition 
of “property” also contains Explanation which is for the 
removal of doubts and to clarify that the term property 
includes property of any kind used in the commission of 
an offence under the 2002 Act or any of the scheduled 
offences.
108. In the earlier part of this judgment, we have 
already noted that every crime property need not be 
termed as proceeds of crime but the converse may be 
true. Additionally, some other property if purchased 
or derived from the proceeds of crime even such 
subsequently acquired property must be regarded 
as tainted property and actionable under the Act. For, 
it would become property for the purpose of taking 
action under the 2002 Act which is being used in the 
commission of offence of money laundering. Such 
purposive interpretation would be necessary to uphold 
the purposes and objects for enactment of the 2002 Act.
xxx
xxx
xxx
172. It was also urged before us that the attachment of 
property must be equivalent in value of the proceeds of 
crime only if the proceeds of crime are situated outside 
India. This argument, in our opinion, is tenuous. For, the 
definition of “proceeds of crime” is wide enough to not 
only refer to the property derived or obtained as a result 
of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence, but 
also of the value of any such property. If the property 
is taken or held outside the country, even in such a 
case, the property equivalent in value held within 
the country or abroad can be proceeded with. The 
definition of “property” as in Section 2(1)(v) is equally 
wide enough to encompass the value of the property 
of proceeds of crime. Such interpretation would further 
the legislative intent in recovery of the proceeds of 
crime and vesting it in the Central Government for 
effective prevention of money laundering.

418
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
173. We find force in the stand taken by the Union of 
India that the objectives of enacting the 2002 Act was the 
attachment and confiscation of proceeds of crime which 
is the quintessence so as to combat the evil of money 
laundering. The second proviso, therefore, addresses the 
broad objectives of the 2002 Act to reach the proceeds of 
crime in whosoever’s name they are kept or by whosoever 
they are held. To buttress this argument, reliance has 
been placed on the dictum in Attorney General for India v. 
Amratlal Prajivandas, (1994) 5 SCC 54 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 
1325] and Raman Tech. & Process Engg. Co. v. Solanki 
Traders (2008) 2 SCC 302 : (2008) 1 SCC (Civ) 539].”
(emphasis supplied)
20.	 Chapter – III of the PMLA deals with attachment, adjudication and 
confiscation of property, with one following the other. We wish to 
extract relevant provisions of the said Chapter, for the sake of 
convenience.
Section 8 of the PMLA
“8. Adjudication.— (1) On receipt of a complaint under 
sub-section (5) of Section 5, or applications made under 
sub-section (4) of Section 17 or under sub-section (10) 
of Section 18, if the Adjudicating Authority has reason to 
believe that any person has committed an offence under 
Section 3 or is in possession of proceeds of crime, it may 
serve a notice of not less than thirty days on such person 
calling upon him to indicate the sources of his income, 
earning or assets, out of which or by means of which he 
has acquired the property attached under sub-section 
(1) of Section 5, or, seized or frozen under Section 17 
or Section 18, the evidence on which he relies and other 
relevant information and particulars, and to show cause 
why all or any of such properties should not be declared 
to be the properties involved in money-laundering and 
confiscated by the Central Government:
Provided that where a notice under this sub-section 
specifies any property as being held by a person on behalf 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
419
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
of any other person, a copy of such notice shall also be 
served upon such other person:
Provided further that where such property is held jointly 
by more than one person, such notice shall be served to 
all persons holding such property.
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall, after—
(a)	 considering the reply, if any, to the notice issued 
under sub-section (1);
(b)	 hearing the aggrieved person and the Director 
or any other officer authorised by him in this 
behalf; and
(c)	
taking into account all relevant materials placed 
on record before him,
by an order, record a finding whether all or any of the 
properties referred to in the notice issued under sub-section 
(1) are involved in money-laundering:
Provided that if the property is claimed by a person, 
other than a person to whom the notice had been 
issued, such person shall also be given an opportunity 
of being heard to prove that the property is not involved 
in money-laundering.
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority decides under 
sub-section (2) that any property is involved in money-
laundering, he shall, by an order in writing, confirm the 
attachment of the property made under sub-section (1) 
of Section 5 or retention of property or record seized 
or frozen under Section 17 or Section 18 and record a 
finding to that effect, whereupon such attachment or 
retention or freezing of the seized or frozen property 
or record shall—
(a)	 continue during [investigation for a period 
not exceeding three hundred and sixty-five 
days or the pendency of the proceedings 
relating to any offence under this Act before 
a court or under the corresponding law of 
any other country, before the competent 

420
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
court of criminal jurisdiction outside India, 
as the case may be; and
(b)	 become final after an order of confiscation 
is passed under sub-section (5) or sub-
section (7) of Section 8 or Section 58-B 
or sub-section (2-A) of Section 60 by the 
Special Court.
Explanation.—For the purposes of computing the 
period of three hundred and sixty-five days under 
clause (a), the period during which the investigation is 
stayed by any court under any law for the time being 
in force shall be excluded.
(4) Where the provisional order of attachment made under 
sub-section (1) of Section 5 has been confirmed under 
sub-section (3), the Director or any other officer authorised 
by him in this behalf shall forthwith take the possession 
of the property attached under Section 5 or frozen under 
sub-section (1-A) of Section 17, in such manner as may 
be prescribed:
Provided that if it is not practicable to take possession of 
a property frozen under sub-section (1-A) of Section 17, 
the order of confiscation shall have the same effect as if 
the property had been taken possession of.
(5) Where on conclusion of a trial of an offence under 
this Act, the Special Court finds that the offence of 
money-laundering has been committed, it shall order 
that such property involved in the money-laundering or 
which has been used for commission of the offence of 
money-laundering shall stand confiscated to the Central 
Government.
(6) Where on conclusion of a trial under this Act, the 
Special Court finds that the offence of money-laundering 
has not taken place or the property is not involved in 
money-laundering, it shall order release of such property 
to the person entitled to receive it.
(7) Where the trial under this Act cannot be conducted 
by reason of the death of the accused or the accused 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
421
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
being declared a proclaimed offender or for any 
other reason or having commenced but could not be 
concluded, the Special Court shall, on an application 
moved by the Director or a person claiming to be 
entitled to possession of a property in respect of 
which an order has been passed under sub-section 
(3) of Section 8, pass appropriate orders regarding 
confiscation or release of the property, as the case 
may be, involved in the offences of money-laundering 
after having regard to the material before it.
(8) Where a property stands confiscated to the Central 
Government under sub-section (5), the Special Court, 
in such manner as may be prescribed, may also direct 
the Central Government to restore such confiscated 
property or part thereof of a claimant with a legitimate 
interest in the property, who may have suffered a 
quantifiable loss as a result of the offence of money 
laundering:
Provided that the Special Court shall not consider such 
claim unless it is satisfied that the claimant has acted in 
good faith and has suffered the loss despite having taken 
all reasonable precautions and is not involved in the offence 
of money laundering
Provided further that the Special Court may, if it thinks 
fit, consider the claim of the claimant for the purposes 
of restoration of such properties during the trial of the 
case in such manner as may be prescribed.”
(emphasis supplied)
Section 9 of the PMLA
“9. Vesting of property in Central Government.— Where 
an order of confiscation has been made under sub-
section (5) or sub-section (7) of Section 8 or Section 
58-B or sub-section (2-A) of Section 60 in respect 
of any property of a person, all the rights and title 
in such property shall vest absolutely in the Central 
Government free from all encumbrances:

422
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Provided that where the Special Court or the Adjudicating 
Authority, as the case may be, after giving an opportunity of 
being heard to any other person interested in the property 
attached under this Chapter, or seized or frozen under 
Chapter V, is of the opinion that any encumbrance on the 
property or lease-hold interest has been created with a 
view to defeat the provisions of this Chapter, it may, by 
order, declare such encumbrances or lease-hold interest 
to be void and thereupon the aforesaid property shall vest 
in the Central Government free from such encumbrances 
or lease-hold interest:
Provided further that nothing in this section shall operate 
to discharge any person from any liability in respect of 
such encumbrances which may be enforced against such 
person by a suit for damages.”
(emphasis supplied)
Confirmation of a Provisional Attachment Order
21.	 Section 8 of the PMLA gets attracted upon filing of a complaint under 
Section 5(5) of the PMLA after a PAO is passed by the Director 
or any other officer, or when applications are made under Section 
17(4) or Section 18(10) of the PMLA pursuant to the retention of 
property or record seized or frozen under Section 17 or Section 
18 of the PMLA. Under Section 8(1) of the PMLA, the Adjudicating 
Authority, after satisfying itself that there exist reasons to believe that 
a person has committed an offence under Section 3 of the PMLA 
or is in possession of the proceeds of crime, is expected to serve 
notice on such a person calling upon him to indicate the sources of 
his income, earning or assets, out of which or by means of which he 
has acquired the property attached under Section 5(1) of the PMLA 
or, seized or frozen under Section 17 or Section 18 of the PMLA. 
22.	 The expression “any person” used in Section 8(1) of the PMLA, gives 
a wide power of examination to the Adjudicating Authority for the 
purpose of taking a decision qua confirming a PAO under Section 
5(1) of the PMLA or the retention of property or record seized or 
frozen under Section 17 or Section 18 of the PMLA. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
423
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
23.	 The proviso to Section 8(2) of the PMLA facilitates ‘any other 
person’ claiming the property, in respect of which a notice has been 
issued under Section 8(1) of the PMLA, to be heard, in order to 
prove that the said property is not involved in money-laundering. 
Thus, while exercising the power of confirmation under Section 8(3) 
of the PMLA, the Adjudicating Authority is expected to conduct a 
proper inquiry into the question of whether the property is involved 
in money-laundering.
24.	 Upon confirmation of the PAO under Section 8(3) of the PMLA, the 
designated officer of the prosecuting agency shall forthwith take 
possession under Section 8(4) of the PMLA. The decision of the 
Adjudicating Authority, in confirming the attachment, is subject to a 
challenge, if any, before the higher forums under the PMLA. 
25.	 Section 8(3)(b) of the PMLA gives an element of finality to a 
confirmation order once an order of confiscation is passed by the 
Special Court under Section 8(5) or Section 8(7) or Section 58B or 
Section 60(2A) of the PMLA. Therefore, the confirmation of attachment 
under Section 8(3) of the PMLA would be subject to confiscation 
under the aforementioned provisions. In other words, though the 
attachment continues after its confirmation, it is only meant to be 
so till an order of confiscation is passed. 
Confiscation/Release of properties upon conclusion of the trial
26.	 Once the Special Court, after conclusion of the trial, holds that the 
offence of money-laundering has been committed, Section 8(5) of 
the PMLA mandates the Special Court to confiscate the property to 
the Central Government. Alternatively, if the Special Court concludes 
that the offence of money-laundering has not been committed, then 
Section 8(6) of the PMLA gets attracted, leading to the release of 
the property to the person entitled to receive it.
Confiscation/Release of properties due to non-conduct of the trial
27.	 Section 8(7) of the PMLA allows confiscation of properties in the 
event of non-conduct of the trial, and is a complete provision by 
itself. A sine qua non for the Special Court to decide an application 
under Section 8(7) of the PMLA is an order of confirmation of the 
PAO by the Adjudicating Authority under Section 8(3) of the PMLA. 

424
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
28.	 Section 8(7) of the PMLA can only be pressed into service in 
case of a contingency, on an application to be moved either by 
the Director of the prosecuting agency or a person claiming to be 
entitled to possession of the property. The said contingency would 
include situations such as when the trial cannot be conducted by 
reason of the death of the accused, or if the accused is declared 
as a proclaimed offender, or for any other reason, or the trial having 
commenced but could not be concluded. The expression “any other 
reason or having commenced but could not be concluded” must 
be read in conjunction with either the death of the accused, or the 
declaration of the accused as a proclaimed offender, in view of the 
principle of ejusdem generis. 
29.	 Circumstances aforestated must be evident and in existence and, 
hence, the expression “material before it,” occurring in Section 8(7) 
of the PMLA, must be understood in the context of demonstrating 
the same, as the scope of inquiry under Section 8(7) of the PMLA 
is rather limited and the Special Court does not have the power to 
review a decision under Section 8(3) of the PMLA.
Expression “material before it” vis-à-vis Section 8(7) of the PMLA 
30.	 The expression “material before it” can also be understood from 
the standpoint of a person who was not a party to the proceedings 
under Section 8(3) of the PMLA before the Adjudicating Authority. 
Law does not necessarily bind a party qua an order passed by a 
statutory authority in his absence. Therefore, such a party can certainly 
invoke Section 8(7) of the PMLA, provided that the circumstances 
mentioned thereunder are available, coupled with entitlement to 
possession of the property in respect of which an order has been 
passed under Section 8(3) of the PMLA, in which case, the Special 
Court is expected to consider such material placed before it. 
31.	 A limited caveat is, however, necessary in the case of a person who 
has suffered an adverse order before the Adjudicating Authority under 
Section 8(3) of the PMLA. Such a person cannot, as a matter of right, 
invoke Section 8(7) of the PMLA. However, by way of exception, such 
relief may be sought only on the basis of any new material placed for 
the first time before the Special Court. Such an interpretation would 
give meaningful effect to the expression “material before it” occurring 
in Section 8(7) of the PMLA. Any other interpretation would vest the 
Special Court with a power of review over an order passed under 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
425
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
Section 8(3) of the PMLA which is clearly not contemplated under the 
scheme of the PMLA. The restriction, therefore, is that the material 
relied upon by such a party in proceedings under Section 8(7) of 
the PMLA must not have been considered by any forum exercising 
jurisdiction under Section 8(3) of the PMLA. 
32.	 As iterated while discussing Section 8(3)(b) of the PMLA, an order 
of confiscation by the Special Court under Section 8(7) of the PMLA 
gives finality to a confirmation order.
Procedure and Powers of the Appellate Tribunal
33.	 As against the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under 
Section 8(3) of the PMLA, an appeal lies to the Appellate Tribunal 
under Section 26 of the PMLA. Section 25 of the PMLA states that the 
Appellate Tribunal under the PMLA shall be the one constituted under 
Section 12 of the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators 
(Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the 
“SAFEMA”).
Section 25 of the PMLA
“25. Appellate Tribunal.—The Appellate Tribunal 
constituted under sub-section (1) of Section 12 of 
the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators 
(Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 (13 of 1976) shall 
be the Appellate Tribunal for hearing appeals against 
the orders of the Adjudicating Authority and the other 
authorities under this Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
Section 12 of the SAFEMA
“12. Constitution of Appellate Tribunal.—(1) The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute an Appellate Tribunal consisting 
of a Chairman and such number of other members 
(being officers of the Central Government not below 
the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government) as the 
Central Government thinks fit, to be appointed by the 
Government for hearing appeals against the orders made.

426
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(a)	 under Section 7, sub-section (1) of Section 9 
or Section 10;
(b)	 under Section 68-F, Section 68-I, sub-section (1) 
of Section 68-K or Section 68-L of the Narcotic 
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 
(61 of 1985);
(c)	
by the Adjudicating Authority or any other 
authority under the Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002 (15 of 2003);
(d)	 by the Adjudicating Authorities, Competent 
Authorities and the Qualifications, Special 
Director (Appeals) under the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999).
(2) The Chairman of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a 
person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme 
Court or of a High Court.”
xxx
xxx
xxx
(emphasis supplied)
Section 26 of the PMLA
“26. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.—(1) Save as 
otherwise provided in sub-section (3), the Director 
or any person aggrieved by an order made by the 
Adjudicating Authority under this Act, may prefer an 
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
(2) Any reporting entity aggrieved by any order of the 
Director made under sub-section (2) of Section 13, may 
prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
(3) Every appeal preferred under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2) shall be filed within a period of forty-five 
days from the date on which a copy of the order made 
by the Adjudicating Authority or Director is received 
and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such 
fee as may be prescribed:

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
427
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving an 
opportunity of being heard, entertain an appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of forty-five days if it is satisfied 
that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that 
period.
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), or sub-
section (2), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass 
such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying 
or setting aside the order appealed against.
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every 
order made by it to the parties to the appeal and to the 
Adjudicating Authority or the Director concerned, as the 
case may be.
(6) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be dealt with 
by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall 
be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within 
six months from the date of filing of the appeal.”
(emphasis supplied)
Section 35 of the PMLA
“35. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal.—
(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the 
procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles 
of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions 
of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have powers 
to regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes 
of discharging its functions under this Act, the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit, 
in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a)	 summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
person and examining him on oath;

428
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(b)	 requiring the discovery and production of 
documents;
(c)	
receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d)	 subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 
124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872, 
requisitioning any public record or document or 
copy of such record or document from any office;
(e)	 issuing commissions for the examination of 
witnesses or documents;
(f)	
reviewing its decisions;
(g)	 dismissing a representation for default or 
deciding it ex parte;
(h)	 setting aside any order of dismissal of any 
representation for default or any order passed 
by it ex parte; and
(i)	
any other matter, which may be, prescribed by 
the Central Government.
(3) An order made by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act 
shall be executable by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree 
of civil court and, for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal 
shall have all the powers of a civil court.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 
(3), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any order made 
by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil 
court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made 
by that court.
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860) and the Appellate Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 
345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974).”
(emphasis supplied)

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
429
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
34.	 Section 12(2) of the SAFEMA, 1976 provides that the Appellate 
Tribunal shall be headed by either a sitting or retired Judge of 
the High Court or the Supreme Court which by virtue of Section 
25 of the PMLA becomes the Appellate Tribunal under the PMLA. 
Proceedings before it are akin to trying a suit, with the same powers 
as those vested in a civil Court. These proceedings are deemed to 
be judicial in nature and orders passed by the Appellate Tribunal 
have the trappings of a decree of a civil Court. As per Section 35(1) 
of the PMLA, the Appellate Tribunal can regulate its own procedure, 
not bound by the procedural constraints laid down by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908. Thus, the Appellate Tribunal has additional 
powers which may otherwise not be available with a civil Court. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal may further file an appeal to the High Court under Section 
42 of the PMLA. 
35.	 The fact that a robust mechanism is provided for by fixing a higher 
qualification for the constitution of the Appellate Tribunal is a clear 
indicator that a decision under Section 8(3) of the PMLA is not meant 
to be brought under the judicial scrutiny of the Special Court. We 
also take note of the time limit prescribed under Section 26(6) of the 
PMLA for the Appellate Tribunal to dispose of an appeal filed before 
it as expeditiously as possible, and make an endeavour to do so 
within a period of six months. This provision not only indicates the 
urgency for disposal, but also recognises that the right of a party to 
invoke Section 8(7) of the PMLA, in a given case, cannot be kept 
in suspense for a long time.
36.	 Thus, when an appeal or a further challenge is pending before the 
Appellate Tribunal or the concerned higher forum against an order 
passed under Section 8(3) of the PMLA, the Special Court is expected 
to refrain from dealing with an application filed under Section 8(7) of 
the PMLA, without awaiting the disposal of such appeal or further 
challenge. We also say so in view of the doctrine of merger.
Doctrine of merger vis-à-vis an order under Section 8(3) of the 
PMLA
37.	 When a challenge is made to an order passed by the Adjudicating 
Authority under Section 8(3) of the PMLA before the Appellate Tribunal 
under Section 26 of the PMLA, or the High Court under Section 42 

430
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the PMLA, or the Supreme Court thereafter, the order passed by 
such higher forum supersedes and replaces the earlier confirmation 
order, in view of the doctrine of merger. Thus, there can be only one 
order under Section 8(3) of the PMLA. Once an order under Section 
8(3) of the PMLA is challenged, a deemed embargo operates on 
the conclusion of the proceedings under Section 8(7) of the PMLA. 
Thus, there is a deemed stay on the proceedings under Section 8(7) 
of the PMLA until the confirmation order attains finality. 
Restoration of properties under Section 8(8) of the PMLA
38.	 Section 8(8) of the PMLA deals with the consequential action that 
the Special Court is expected to undertake after a property stands 
confiscated to the Central Government under Section 8(5) of the 
PMLA. Section 8(8) of the PMLA restricts the power of the Special 
Court in considering a claim for restoration, only to a case where the 
claimant has a legitimate interest in the property and has also suffered 
a quantifiable loss as a result of the offence of money-laundering. This 
is subject to the further restriction that such a claimant has acted in 
good faith, is not involved in the offence of money-laundering and, 
despite taking all reasonable precautions, has suffered the loss. 
Therefore, the onus is heavily placed on the claimant, wherein he 
is required to prove his bona fides. 
39.	 The second proviso to Section 8(8) of the PMLA is an exception 
to Section 8(8) of the PMLA which facilitates a claimant to make a 
claim for restoration of properties during the pendency of the trial. 
The circumstances under which such a power can be exercised is 
on the basis of a prescription in the form of rules. Therefore, the 
provision itself facilitates rules to be prescribed on the manner in 
which the aforesaid claim may be considered. This proviso must 
be read in consonance with Sections 73 and 74 of the PMLA 
which empowers the Central Government to make the requisite 
rules that are to be laid before the Parliament before it comes into 
the statute. The relevant rules in this regard are the Prevention of 
Money-laundering (Restoration of Confiscated Property) Rules, 2016 
(hereinafter referred to as the “2016 Rules”), as amended in 2019. 
40.	 At this juncture, we take note of the fact that the second proviso 
to Section 8(8) of the PMLA, having been introduced by way of a 
subsequent amendment, is meant to give adequate relief to a claimant. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
431
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
In other words, a claimant need not wait for the conclusion of a trial 
under the PMLA if he is able to satisfy the requisite parameters as 
stipulated under the 2016 Rules. 
Rule 2 of the 2016 Rules
“2. Definitions.—In these rules, unless the context 
otherwise requires,—
xxx
xxx
xxx
(b)	 “claimant” means a person who has acted in good 
faith and has suffered a quantifiable loss as a 
result of the offence of Money-laundering despite 
having taken all reasonable precautions, and is 
not involved in the offence of money-laundering;”
(emphasis supplied)
Rule 3A of 2016 Rules
“3A. Manner of restoration of property during trial. —(1)
The Special Court, after framing of the charge under 
section 4 of the Act, on the basis of an application 
moved for restoration of a property attached under 
sub-section (1) of section 5, or, seized or frozen under 
section 17 or section 18 of the Act prior to confiscation, 
if it thinks fit, may, for the purposes of the second 
proviso to sub-section (8) of section 8 of the Act, cause 
to be published a notice in two daily newspapers, one in 
English language and one in vernacular language, having 
sufficient circulation in the locality where such property is 
situated calling upon the claimants, who claim to have 
a legitimate interest in such property or part thereof, to 
submit and establish their claims, if any, for obtaining 
restoration of such property or part thereof.”
(emphasis supplied)
41.	 Though the PMLA does not define a claimant, Rule 2(b) of the 2016 
Rules defines a ‘claimant’ as one who has acted in good faith and 
has suffered a quantifiable loss, pursuant to an offence of money-

432
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
laundering, even after taking all necessary precautions. An essential 
condition is that he should not be involved in the offence of money-
laundering. Thus, a ‘claimant,’ as mentioned under the proviso, has 
to be understood on the touchstone of Rule 2(b) of the 2016 Rules. 
As a necessary corollary, such a person can only be a third party 
who is not arraigned as an accused, and his entitlement is subject 
to the conditions imposed by the definition under Rule 2(b) read with 
Rule 3A of the 2016 Rules. 
42.	 Rule 3A of the 2016 Rules deals with the manner in which restoration 
of a property can be ordered for during the trial. For the exercise of 
such power, it is mandatory for the charges under Section 4 of the 
PMLA to have already been framed. Only then can an application 
under the second proviso to Section 8(8) of the PMLA be filed. Such 
an application may be for restoration of a property attached under 
Section 5(1) of the PMLA, or seized or frozen under Sections 17 or 
18 of the PMLA which are obviously prior to confiscation, after which 
due publication will have to be made. Under this Rule, the Special 
Court will have to satisfy itself that a ‘claimant’ has established 
his legitimate interest in the property which would obviously be a 
question of fact. Thus, the second proviso to Section 8(8) of the 
PMLA has to be understood and read along with Rule 2(b) and Rule 
3A of 2016 Rules. 
Vesting of Confiscated properties with the Central Government
43.	 Once an order of confiscation has been made either under Section 
8(5), or Section 8(7), or Section 58B, or Section 60(2A) of the PMLA, 
the confiscated properties vest in favour of the Central Government, 
as provided under Section 9 of the PMLA. Resultantly, any right or 
title over the property, qua a third party, gets extinguished, since 
such a vesting becomes absolute. By the operation of law, the 
Central Government gets ownership of the property, free from any 
encumbrances. Hence, this provision clearly delineates the final 
consequence of a confiscation order. 
44.	 To sum up, Chapter – III of the PMLA provides a comprehensive 
picture of how properties involved in the offence of money-laundering 
are to be dealt with. With the aforesaid discussion, we shall now 
proceed to analyse the facts of the instant appeal.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
433
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
ANALYSIS
45.	 Admittedly, the appellant company, having suffered an order under 
Section 8(3) of the PMLA, had preferred an appeal under Section 26 
of the PMLA which was pending on the file of the Appellate Tribunal 
even at the time of filing of the applications under Sections 8(7) 
and 8(8) of the PMLA. The fact that the said appeal was pending 
before the Appellate Tribunal, for want of coram, is not in dispute. 
The decision of the Adjudicating Authority under Section 8(3) of 
the PMLA is subject to the outcome of any further challenge to 
the same. 
46.	 As discussed, the powers of the Appellate Tribunal are rather 
wide and exhaustive. What is referred to under Section 8(7) of the 
PMLA is a confirmation order which has attained finality. At the 
cost of repetition, once an order under Section 8(3) of the PMLA is 
challenged before a higher forum, a deemed embargo operates on 
the conclusion of the proceedings under Section 8(7) of the PMLA. 
Hence, the Special Court cannot go into the issues which the higher 
forums have been entrusted with. When an appeal is provided for 
under the statute, it gives a vested right to any aggrieved person 
to exhaust the same. 
47.	 In the present case, we are concerned with the decision-making 
process adopted by the Special Court, as confirmed by the High 
Court. Instead of deferring the application filed under Section 8(7) 
of the PMLA, and awaiting the adjudication by the Appellate Tribunal 
under Section 26 of the PMLA, the Special Court has allowed the 
said application, for which exhaustive reasons have been given 
independently on merits. The Special Court has, in effect, rendered 
the appeal under Section 26 of the PMLA infructuous. The said action 
at the instance of the Special Court is totally impermissible in law. 
48.	 We have already discussed the scope and ambit of the proceedings 
under Section 8(7) of the PMLA which is predicated upon an order 
under Section 8(3) of the PMLA that has attained finality. The Special 
Court is required to act in furtherance of the order passed under 
Section 8(3) of the PMLA, including those which may be passed by 
the higher forums, upon being challenged before them. Hence, the 
aforesaid decision-making process adopted by the Special Court is 
legally untenable. 

434
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
49.	 Insofar as the application filed by the appellant under Section 8(8) of 
the PMLA is concerned, we find that it has been correctly dismissed 
by the Special Court. Having preferred an appeal under Section 26 
of the PMLA against the order suffered under Section 8(3) of the 
PMLA, and not having demonstrated that it suffered a quantifiable 
loss as a result of the offence of money-laundering, the necessary 
conditions under Section 8(8) of the PMLA have not been satisfied 
by the appellant company.
50.	 In such view of the matter, we set aside the order passed by the 
Special Court allowing the application under Section 8(7) of the 
PMLA, as confirmed by the High Court in the impugned order. We 
are also conscious of the fact that after filing the present appeal, 
the Appellate Tribunal has dismissed the appeal under Section 26 
of the PMLA, as having become infructuous. 
51.	 Hence, the interest of justice would require that the order passed 
by the Appellate Tribunal under Section 26 of the PMLA also be set 
aside, as merits have not been gone into by the Appellate Tribunal 
for no fault of the appellant. It would only be fair and just to restore 
the said appeal for a decision on merits. 
CONCLUSION
52.	 On the basis of the interpretation given by us in this judgment, we 
conclude as follows:
	•
Section 8(7) and Section 8(8) of the PMLA are stand-alone 
provisions.
	•
Section 8(7) of the PMLA gets attracted only in case of a 
contingency and an application under the said provision can 
be decided by the Special Court only once the confirmation 
order attains finality.
	•
The expression “material before it” occurring in Section 8(7) 
of the PMLA has a limited import to the extent of showing the 
contingency and the entitlement to possession as regards the 
Director or any third party. In case of a party who has suffered 
an adverse order under Section 8(3) of the PMLA, relief under 
Section 8(7) of the PMLA can be sought for, provided there is 
new material that was not placed before or considered by the 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
435
M/s. Nav Nirman Builders & Developers Pvt. Ltd. Through its Managing Director, Naveen Singh v. 
The Union of India Through Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Govt of India Ranchi, Jharkhand
Adjudicating Authority under Section 8(3) of the PMLA, or by 
the higher forums, if so challenged.
	•
An application under the second proviso to Section 8(8) of 
the PMLA can only be filed subject to satisfying the essential 
conditions laid down by Rules 2(b) and 3A of the 2016 Rules.
53.	 For the foregoing reasons, we set aside the order dated 15.09.2022 
passed by the Special Court allowing the application filed by the 
respondent under Section 8(7) of the PMLA, as confirmed by 
the High Court vide the impugned order dated 27.02.2023. The 
application filed by the appellant under Section 8(8) of the PMLA 
was not maintainable.
DIRECTIONS
54.	 Consequently, the following directions are issued:
(i)	
The Appellate Tribunal is directed to take up the appeal filed 
by the appellant under Section 26 of the PMLA on its file, 
notwithstanding its earlier order passed on 23.08.2023, and 
decide it on its own merits, within a period of 4 weeks from the 
date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
(ii)	
The application filed by the respondent under Section 8(7) of 
the PMLA is directed to be kept pending and be taken up after 
the disposal of the challenge to the order under Section 8(3) 
of the PMLA by the higher forum(s).
55.	 We make it clear that our factual observations, being prima facie in 
nature, shall have no bearing on the further proceedings.
56.	 The appeal stands allowed, accordingly. 
57.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
