[2026] 2 S.C.R. 610 : 2026 INSC 147
Hemlata Eknath Pise
v.
Shubham Bahu-uddeshiya Sanstha 
Waddhamna & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 1558-1559 of 2026)
11 February 2026
[Dipankar Datta and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court erred in remanding the matter to the 
School Tribunal to consider afresh the claim of the appellant for 
reinstatement in service, based on its consideration of only a sole 
point raised on behalf of the first respondent while not dealing with 
the other points raised.
Headnotes†
Judgment/Order – Several issues raised, matter decided 
considering a solitary point without dealing with other points – 
Impermissibility – School Tribunal set aside the order of the 
first respondent dismissing the appellant from service and 
granted reinstatement together with consequential benefits 
to her – Writ petition filed by first respondent – High Court 
considering a solitary point raised on behalf of the first 
respondent (i.e., the Tribunal had not looked into all the 
records and proceedings, more particularly the resolution 
authorizing the Secretary thereof to initiate proceedings 
against the appellant) and without looking into any other point, 
remanded the matter to the Tribunal to consider afresh the 
claim of the appellant for reinstatement in service – Review 
petition filed by appellant, rejected – Challenge to the order 
allowing the writ petition and the order dismissing the review 
petition:
Held: When several issues arise for being answered by a Court 
in the facts of a given case, ideally, disposal thereof ought to be 
preceded by recording the Court’s answers to each of such issues 
with reasons rather than the decision of the Court focusing on just 
one decisive point – High Court ought not to have remanded the 
matter to the Tribunal for a fresh decision based on its consideration 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
611
Hemlata Eknath Pise v.  
Shubham Bahu-uddeshiya Sanstha Waddhamna & Ors.
of only a sole point – Even if the Secretary of the first respondent 
were authorized to draw up proceedings against the appellant 
by issuing charge-sheet, whether or not the inquiry suffered from 
breach of principles of natural justice, as claimed, and also as to 
whether the findings of the Tribunal were justified, ought to have 
engaged the High Court’s due consideration – High Court faltered 
in deciding only one single point while not dealing with the others, 
which is a fundamental flaw vitiating its order – Impugned orders 
set aside, writ petition remanded to the High Court for a fresh 
consideration thereof in the light of the claims and defences of 
the parties. [Paras 8-10]
Judgment/Order – Reasoned decision – Several issues raised, 
each of such issue to be dealt with:
Held: When several issues arise for being answered by a Court 
in the facts of a given case, ideally, disposal thereof ought to be 
preceded by recording the Court’s answers to each of such issues 
with reasons rather than the decision of the Court focusing on just 
one decisive point – This approach, apart from ensuring that all 
issues are considered providing clarity and assuring some sort of a 
finality, would respect the rights of the litigants to a comprehensive 
decision; also, if an appeal were carried from such decision, the 
appellate court would be benefitted by a reasoned decision of the 
original court. [Para 9]
List of Keywords
Only one single point decided while not dealing with the others; 
Solitary point raised was considered; No other point looked into; 
Several issues raised; Only one single point decided; Reasoned 
decision; School Tribunal; Dismissal from service; Claim for 
reinstatement in service; Reached the age of superannuation; 
Matter wrongly remanded.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 1558-1559 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 05.09.2024 and 25.09.2024 
of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay at Nagpur in WP No. 
5899 of 2019 and MRA No. 838 of 2024, respectively

612
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Amol B. Karande, B Lakshmi Pallesh, Ms. Akshda, Ashutosh 
Shrivastava, Manoj Ramkrushna Shete.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Satyajit A. Desai, Sachin Patil, Parth Johri, Sachin Singh, Pratik 
Kumar Singh, Shashank Upadhyay, Madhur Duggal, Sanchit 
Agrahari, Ms. Anagha S. Desai, Narendar Rao Taneer, Ms. M. 
Harshini, Sravan Kumar Karanam, Naman Tandon, Siddharth 
Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Shrirang B. Varma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, Nagpur 
by the impugned judgment and order dated 05th September, 2024 
allowed a writ petition1 filed by the first respondent. A remand was 
ordered to the School Tribunal, Nagpur2 to consider afresh the claim 
of the appellant for reinstatement in service upon quashing of the 
final order of dismissal from service.
3.	
Incidentally, the Tribunal vide its order dated 8th August, 2019 had 
set aside an order of the first respondent dismissing the appellant 
from service and granted reinstatement together with consequential 
benefits to her. 
4.	
Perusal of the impugned order dated 05th September, 2024 reveals 
that the High Court considered a solitary point raised on behalf of 
the first respondent, i.e., the Tribunal had not looked into all the 
records and proceedings more particularly the resolution authorizing 
the Secretary thereof to initiate proceedings against the appellant, 
and upon recording a satisfaction that the Tribunal needs to revisit 
the matter and without looking into any other point, expressed the 
view that a remand was indeed called for. It was accordingly ordered, 
while quashing the Tribunal’s aforesaid order dated 8th August, 2019. 
1	
Writ Petition No.5899 of 2019
2	
Tribunal

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
613
Hemlata Eknath Pise v.  
Shubham Bahu-uddeshiya Sanstha Waddhamna & Ors.
5.	
Crestfallen, the appellant applied for a review of the order dated 05th 
September, 20243, contending that the disciplinary proceedings that 
were initiated had been conducted in gross breach of the principles 
of natural justice. She highlighted not being allowed to cross examine 
all the prosecution witnesses. In fact, the High Court’s attention was 
sought to be drawn to the factual position that cross examination of 
the main witness of the management was in progress on 31st July, 
2017, and it was deferred till the next date when it was supposed 
to resume; however, on 1st August, 2017, the inquiry officer abruptly 
closed the proceedings without granting opportunity to the appellant 
to complete cross-examination of the said witness as well as the 
other witnesses. She also sought to contend that the Tribunal had 
found the charges not to have been proved. By applying for review, 
she urged the High Court to consider the aforesaid points.
6.	
The review petition, however, did not find favour with the High Court 
which, by its order dated 25th September, 2024, rejected the same.
7.	
The order dated 05th September, 2024 allowing the writ petition and 
the order dated 25th September, 2024 dismissing the review petition 
are the subject matter of challenge in these appeals.
8.	
In our considered view, having regard to the aforesaid facts and 
circumstances, the High Court ought not to have remanded the 
matter to the Tribunal for a fresh decision based on its consideration 
of only the sole point noticed above. Even if the Secretary of the 
first respondent were authorized to draw up proceedings against the 
appellant by issuing charge-sheet, whether or not the inquiry suffered 
from breach of principles of natural justice, as claimed, and also as 
to whether the findings of the Tribunal were justified, ought to have 
engaged the High Court’s due consideration. 
9.	
Law is pretty well-settled that when several issues arise for being 
answered by a Court in the facts of a given case, ideally, disposal 
thereof ought to be preceded by recording the Court’s answers to 
each of such issues with reasons rather than the decision of the 
Court focusing on just one decisive point. This approach, apart from 
ensuring that all issues are considered providing clarity and assuring 
some sort of a finality, would respect the rights of the litigants to a 
3	
MRA No.838/2024

614
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
comprehensive decision; also, if an appeal were carried from such 
decision, the appellate court would be benefitted by a reasoned 
decision of the original court. 
10.	 The High Court, thus, appears to have faltered in deciding only one 
single point while not dealing with the others, which is a fundamental 
flaw vitiating its order dated 5th September, 2024. Accordingly, we set 
aside the orders impugned in these appeals and order a remand of 
the writ petition to the High Court for a fresh consideration thereof 
in the light of the claims and defences of the parties.
11.	 Since the appellant has reached the age of superannuation and there 
is, thus, no question of her reinstatement in service, inter alia, the 
primary questions that would necessarily arise for decision before 
the High Court are whether: (i) the Tribunal was justified in interfering 
with the disciplinary action taken by the first respondent against the 
appellant and (ii) the appellant would be entitled to back wages as 
well as retiral benefits, should the first question be decided against 
the first respondent.
12.	 We request the Chief Justice of the High Court of Bombay to assign 
the writ petition to the roster Bench for its consideration and disposal 
in accordance with law, as early as possible, preferably within a 
period of four months of such assignment.
13.	 All questions on fact and law are kept open for the parties to urge 
before the High Court. 
14.	 We also leave it open to the parties to explore a mediated settlement 
notwithstanding that no such settlement in that behalf could be 
reached before us.
15.	 The appeals stand allowed on the aforesaid terms.
16.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
