[2026] 2 S.C.R. 455 : 2026 INSC 135
ITC Limited
v.
Aashna Roy
(Civil Appeal No. 3318 of 2023)
06 February 2026
[Rajesh Bindal* and Manmohan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the National Commission was justified in 
awarding a compensation of ₹2 crores to the respondent-model 
for a faulty haircut she took at the beauty salon in the appellant’s 
Hotel.
Headnotes†
Consumer Protection Act, 1986 – Deficiency in service – 
Allegation of faulty haircut – Respondent-model visited the 
beauty salon in the appellant’s hotel for haircut – Dissatisfied 
with the services rendered, she filed complaint before National 
Commission – Commission awarded a compensation of ₹2 
crores to the respondent holding the appellant guilty of the 
deficiency in service and medical negligence – In an appeal 
thereagainst, this Court upheld the finding of fact recorded 
by the Commission regarding deficiency in service, however, 
set aside the amount of compensation awarded to the 
respondent since no material placed on record to justify the 
claim, and remitted the matter to the Commission and the 
sum of ₹25 lakhs deposited by the appellant before this Court 
was to be transmitted to the Commission – Review petition 
and Curative petition filed, which were dismissed – After 
remand, respondent enhanced her claim to ₹5.20 crores and 
produced documents on record before the Commission to 
substantiate her claim, while the appellant filed applications 
praying for production of original documents; and seeking 
permission to cross-examine the respondent which was not 
given – However, the Commission, again awarded ₹2 crores 
as compensation, and directed release of ₹25 lakhs in favor 
of the respondent – Correctness:
* Author

456
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: From the evidence placed on record, case not made out 
for such a huge compensation to the respondent – Damages 
cannot be awarded merely on presumptions or whims and fancies 
of the complainant – To make out a case for award of damages, 
especially when the claim is to the tune of crores of rupees, some 
trustworthy and reliable evidence has to be led – It is not a case 
where the Commission could award compensation by applying a 
thumb rule – Claim of compensation was for crores of rupees, for 
which some loss suffered by the respondent because of deficiency 
in service was required to be established – This could not be 
established by merely producing photocopies of the documents, 
wherein even discrepancies have been noticed – Even after 
remand, respondent not been able to make out a case for award 
of such huge compensation – On the basis of photocopies of the 
documents placed on record by the respondent, the Commission 
erred in awarding huge amount of compensation of ₹2 crores, 
which cannot be justified – Observation made by the Commission 
that because of the trauma suffered by the respondent, she may 
not have maintained the originals of the documents produced 
before the Commission, hence, reliance could be placed on mere 
photocopies, cannot be a justification for awarding such a huge 
compensation – Even if the photocopies were to be produced, 
there are other ways and means to justify the claim made on 
that basis – Even if the Code of Civil Procedure may not be 
strictly applicable, the Commission did not assess as to how the 
respondent suffered loss to the tune of ₹2 crores – Impugned 
order passed by the Commission modified to the extent that the 
amount of compensation, to which the respondent is entitled to, 
be restricted to the amount of ₹25 lakhs already released in her 
favor. [Paras 19-24]
Case Law Cited
Chief Administrator, HUDA v. Shakuntala Devi (2017) 2 SCC 301; 
Charan Singh v. Healing Touch Hospital [2000] Supp. 3 SCR 
337 : (2000) 7 SCC 668; Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences v. 
Prasanth S. Dhanaka [2009] 9 SCR 313 : (2009) 6 SCC 1; Malay 
Kumar Ganguly v. Dr. Sukumar Mukherjee and Others [2009] 
13 SCR 1 : (2009) 9 SCC 221; Dr. J.J. Merchant and others v. 
Shrinath Chaturvedi [2002] Supp. 1 SCR 469 : (2002) 6 SCC 
635; R.V.E. Venkatachala Gounder v. Arulmigu Viswesaraswami 
& V.P. Temple and Another [2003] Supp. 4 SCR 450 : (2003) 8 
SCC 752 – referred to.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
457
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
List of Acts
Consumer Protection Act, 1986; Evidence Act, 1872; Bharatiya 
Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023.
List of Keywords
Award of compensation of ₹2 crores by National Commission; 
Faulty haircut; Deficiency in service; Medical negligence; Merely 
producing photocopies of the documents; Award of compensation 
of ₹25 lakhs.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3318 of 2023
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.04.2023 of the National 
Consumers Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi in CC 
No. 1619 of 2018
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Dr. A.M. Singhvi, Sr. Adv., M/s Dua Associates, L.K. Bhushan, 
Ms. Raashi Beri.
Caveator-in-person.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.	
Challenge in the present appeal is to the order1 passed by the 
Commission2 in the Complaint3 filed by the respondent whereby 
compensation of ₹2,00,00,000/- was awarded to her on account of 
deficiency in service.
2.	
Briefly, the facts available on record are that the respondent visited 
the beauty salon in the appellant’s ITC Maurya Hotel at New Delhi 
1	
Dated 25.04.2023 
2	
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission
3	
Consumer Case No.1619 of 2018

458
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
on 12.04.2018 for her haircut. Being dissatisfied with the service 
rendered, the respondent filed a complaint before the Commission in 
July 2018. Vide order dated 21.09.2021, the Commission found the 
appellant guilty of the deficiency in service and medical negligence. 
A sum of ₹2,00,00,000/- was awarded as compensation to the 
respondent. 
2.1	 Aggrieved against the aforesaid order, the appellant preferred 
appeal4 before this Court. Vide judgement dated 07.02.2023, 
the aforesaid appeal was disposed of by this Court, while not 
interfering with the finding of fact recorded by the Commission 
regarding deficiency in service. However, the amount of 
compensation awarded to the respondent was set aside and 
the matter was remitted back to the Commission so far as 
quantum of computation was concerned. It was for the reason 
that there was no material placed on record by the respondent 
to justify her claim. In case any evidence was to be produced 
on record by the respondent before Commission, the appellant 
was entitled to rebut the same. A sum of ₹25,00,000/- deposited 
by the appellant before this Court was directed to be transmitted 
to the Commission. The appellant filed review petition5 against 
the aforesaid order. The same was dismissed by this Court on 
11.07.2023. To complete the narration of fact recorded in the 
earlier round of litigation, it needs to be mentioned that the 
Curative Petition6 filed by the appellant was also dismissed on 
30.01.2024. 
2.2	 After remand, the respondent enhanced her claim from 
₹2,00,00,000/- to ₹5,20,00,000/- and produced certain documents 
on record before the Commission to substantiate her claim. 
The Commission, after consideration of the material produced 
on record by the parties, again awarded7 ₹2,00,00,000/- as 
compensation to the respondent along with interest @ 9% per 
annum from the date of filing of the complaint till payment is 
made. 
4	
Civil Appeal No.6391 of 2021
5	
Review Petition Diary No.9795 of 2023 in C.A. No.6391 of 2021
6	
Curative Petition (Civil) No.392/2023.
7	
Vide Order dated 25.04.2023

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
459
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
2.3	 Aggrieved against the aforesaid order dated 25.04.2023 passed 
by the Commission, the present appeal has been filed by the 
appellant before this Court.
ARGUMENTS OF THE APPELLANT
3.	
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that in the first round of 
litigation, no doubt, this Court upheld the finding of the Commission 
insofar as deficiency in service is concerned, but the quantum of 
compensation was set aside while recording a finding that there 
was no material placed on record by the respondent to justify 
the claim. After remand, the respondent produced photocopies 
of certain documents in her evidence before the Commission on 
21.02.2023. To the aforesaid application filed by the respondent 
seeking to produce photocopies of certain documents in evidence, 
the appellant filed affidavit dated 16.03.2023 wherein the documents 
filed by the respondent were denied. Additionally, in the reply filed 
by the appellant to the respondent’s aforesaid application, it was 
stated that most of the documents were dim or illegible and were 
mere photocopies. It was also stated that respondent is improving 
her case by adducing evidence and adding pleadings that were not 
present in her original complaint.
3.1	 Along with the aforesaid affidavit, two other applications were 
also filed; one was for production of original documents, 
photocopies of which were sought to be produced by the 
respondent in evidence, and another for seeking permission 
of the Commission to cross-examine the respondent. Without 
considering the aforesaid applications filed by the appellant 
and despite the fact that all the documents produced by the 
respondent were categorically denied by the appellant, the 
Commission reiterated the earlier order while awarding the same 
amount of compensation to the respondent as was awarded in 
the first round of litigation. 
3.2	 It was a case of complete violation of principles of natural 
justice and the law for production and appreciation of evidence 
produced on record. All what the respondent had produced 
before the Commission along with an application, were 
photocopies of certain documents with no authenticity. The 
authors of those documents were not produced in evidence to 

460
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
endorse the genuineness thereof. This deprived the appellant 
of an opportunity to cross-examine those persons. Even the 
respondent did not enter witness box to state on oath and 
provide an opportunity to the appellant to cross-examine her. 
In this view of the matter, the impugned order passed by the 
Commission deserves to be set aside.
3.3	 It was further argued that the amount of compensation claimed 
by the respondent was totally imaginary with no loss shown 
to have been suffered by her in any manner. Even from the 
photocopies of the documents produced on record by her, the 
amount of compensation claimed could not possibly be justified. 
It was merely a case of deficiency on account of alleged error 
in hair cutting, which in fact was not there. From the material 
placed on record by the appellant it was established that the 
respondent was satisfied with the services. The same was 
also evident from the appearance captured in the CCTV when 
she entered and left the hotel. The grievance raised by the 
respondent was not significant and even otherwise, the same 
was taken care of to her satisfaction. 
3.4	 Pointing out the defects in the evidence or non-reliability thereof 
as produced by the respondent, learned counsel for the appellant 
submitted that from two pay slips produced on record by the 
respondent for the months of April 2018 and May 2018 from 
M/s. AMC Marketing Research Associates, it is evident that 
before and after the alleged deficiency in service regarding 
faulty haircut, the respondent remained in service on the same 
pay package. 
3.5	 With reference to photocopy of the email from Pavan Goenka 
for some senior level position at Delhi, the submission is that 
it was not a job for modelling, there was nothing pointed out to 
show that because of alleged faulty haircut in April 2018, the 
respondent had lost that job opportunity. Even with respect to 
the photocopy of letter dated 09.04.2018 placed on record, it 
was argued that the same may be fabricated email as nothing 
transpired subsequently, as was disclosed by the respondent. 
No certificate under Section 65-B of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 was produced to substantiate authenticity of the letter, 
only a printout of which was taken out from the computer has 
been produced.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
461
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
3.6	
With regard to the modelling assignment certain photographs 
were attached by the respondent. However, the same do 
not depict as to which period those relate to. Nothing was 
produced on record regarding the signing amount paid to the 
respondent for the aforesaid assignment.
3.7	
Further, a photocopy of the certificate of one Glitz Modelling 
and Production Pvt. Ltd. was produced by the respondent to 
indicate that she had been doing modelling assignment from 
2015 to 2018 and was also offered role in a feature film. These 
also do not substantiate the claim of the respondent for the 
reason that the said certificate does not mention any date and 
no monetary aspects have been detailed out. Moreover, the 
existence of the said company may also be doubtful. 
3.8	
Similar is the position with reference to the photocopy of 
a certificate dated 11.12.2017 from Glitz Modelling and 
Production Pvt. Ltd. proposing a second lead role to the 
respondent in a feature film for which remuneration of ₹60 
lakhs was shown. The aforesaid photocopy of the letter also 
did not substantiate the case of the respondent. She had 
never claimed that she had any experience of working in a 
movie. The aforesaid offer is said to be of 11.12.2017 and the 
alleged faulty haircut was on 12.04.2018. Nothing was placed 
on record to show that any developments had taken place in 
the intervening four months. Nothing was produced on record 
that the said film ever went on floor. 
3.9	
Photocopy of a letter dated 02.02.2018 from Jeet Surendranath, 
Partner, FAR Commercials, offering the respondent annual 
modelling assignment with a reputed haircare brand and other 
brand campaigns for ₹50 lakhs also does not take the case of 
the respondent any further as there is nothing to show that the 
aforesaid offer, if made to the respondent, was ever accepted 
by her. She continued to work with AMC Marketing Research 
Associates till May 2018, as per the letters produced on record 
by her. Moreover, the aforesaid letter was not on letterhead 
of the company, rather it was on a plain paper.
3.10	 Similar is the position with regard to a certificate dated 
11.07.2018 produced by the respondent from Dr. Ranajit 
Kumar Das. It was sought to be claimed that the respondent 

462
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
suffered from mental trauma, depression and anxiety. 
However, the fact remains that photocopy of the documents 
produced does not show that the aforesaid doctor is an expert 
on the subject. His qualifications are not even mentioned in 
the certificate. This document was not produced in the first 
round of litigation. 
3.11	 Photocopy of the certificate dated 13.02.2023 also cannot be 
relied on as the same is as vague as possible, not printed on 
any letter head and does not contain the payment details. It is 
a document dated 13.02.2023, i.e. almost after five years of 
alleged haircut. Though it is stated in the aforesaid certificate 
that the respondent had worked in a short film titled ‘Japanese 
Wife’, however, her name does not feature in that film. In any 
case, it coincides with her earlier employment. Performance in 
any film is a full-time job and it cannot be possible or permitted 
in case the respondent was working in another establishment 
at a senior position with handsome salary.
3.12	 Even otherwise photocopies of the documents produced by 
the respondent, as referred to above, could not possibly be 
produced in the evidence on the basis of which an order could 
be passed. The authenticity and genuineness of the documents 
produced was required to be proved.
3.13	 The appellant had produced an affidavit regarding spa in the 
Hotel stating that as per the requirement of the respondent, 
her hair was trimmed 4 inches from bottom. It was up to 
the satisfaction of the respondent. In the earlier WhatsApp 
chats, there was no mention of loss or agony suffered by the 
respondent; the minor issue raised by her was corrected. None 
of the documents produced in the second round of litigation 
was placed on record in the earlier round of litigation. In the 
first round of litigation, the amount of compensation claimed 
was ₹3,00,00,000/- which was enhanced to ₹5,20,00,000/- in 
the second round of litigation. 
3.14	 Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that before 
the Commission, the appellant had produced a chart showing 
as to how much compensation was assessed in different types 
of case pertaining to deficiency in service. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
463
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
3.15	 All these factors could be thrashed out by the appellant, 
had they been given an opportunity to cross-examine the 
respondent. 
3.16	 Summing up the arguments, it was submitted that the 
entire findings recorded by the Commission were based on 
conjectures and surmises with no admissible evidence on 
record. In support of his plea, reliance was placed by the 
learned senior counsel for the appellant on the judgments of 
this Court in Chief Administrator, HUDA v. Shakuntala Devi8, 
Charan Singh v. Healing Touch Hospital9 and Nizam’s 
Institute of Medical Sciences v Prasanth S. Dhanaka10. 
ARGUMENTS OF THE RESPONDENT
4.	
In response, the respondent who appeared in-person, submitted that 
she is a highly educated woman, being a management post-graduate 
from I.I.M., Calcutta and also Diploma in Mass Communication. All 
what has been stated by the appellant is a bundle of lies. In the first 
round of litigation, this Court had upheld the findings of the Commission 
regarding deficiency in service. The matter was remanded back only 
for assessment of compensation. The respondent, being not legally 
trained, should not be deprived of amount of compensation for 
the financial loss and mental agony suffered by her on account of 
deficiency in service by the appellant. She had a prosperous career 
ahead, which was derailed by the appellant. Length and style of haircut 
of a woman always has relation with her confidence, which may be 
relevant for any managerial job on which she was working or for 
any meeting with officers and also for role in any movie or modelling 
assignment. There is nothing wrong in the evidence produced by 
the respondent before the Commission which has rightly been relied 
upon for assessment of compensation payable to her. 
4.1	 It was further argued that the respondent is running from pillar 
to post for the last 7 years and has still not been compensated 
adequately on account of deficiency in service. It is a lapse on 
the part of the appellant, who have not summoned and cross-
8	
(2017) 2 SCC 301
9	
(2000) 7 SCC 668
10	
(2009) 6 SCC 1

464
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
examined the employers and agencies who had offered her 
role in film or modelling assignment, in order to challenge the 
credibility of the documents produced by her. It is too late for 
the appellant to now claim that they had not been offered the 
opportunity once they had missed the bus. She also alleges 
that none of the copies of the applications filed by the appellant 
was received by her. 
4.2	 It is further argued that when the respondent had gone for 
haircut on 12.04.2018, she was working with AMC Marketing 
Research Associates. She had to quit the job in June 2018 on 
account of faulty haircut which led to loss of confidence in the 
corporate job. The submission is that mere technicalities should 
not come in the way for compensating the respondent for the 
loss and agony suffered by her. The consumer courts are not 
meant to strictly go in that aspect as they have been created 
to be consumer friendly. 
RESPONSE OF THE APPELLANT 
5.	
In response, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that to justify 
her claim of huge compensation of ₹5,20,00,000/-, the respondent 
has not placed on record any income-tax return which could have 
shown her income prior to the incident and thereafter. 
6.	
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant 
referred record.
DISCUSSION 
FIRST ROUND OF LITIGATION
7.	
This Court in the earlier round of litigation vide Judgment dated 
07.02.2023 upheld the findings of the National Commission regarding 
deficiency of service. The next issue arose as to the compensation 
to which the respondent may be entitled to on account of deficiency 
in service. In para 12 of the aforesaid judgment, this Court observed 
that the respondent was repeatedly requested to refer to any material 
placed before the Commission justifying her claim for compensation. 
It was regarding her advertisement and modelling assignments in past 
or for which she entered into contract for the present or the future. As 
the respondent had failed to refer to any material produced before 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
465
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
the Commission in support of her claim, this Court did not find any 
justification in awarding huge compensation of ₹2,00,00,000/- under 
the head of ‘pain, suffering and trauma’. There being no evidence 
produced in support of her claim, this Court had set aside the award 
of the Commission. 
7.1	 It was also noticed that as the respondent was appearing in-
person, as also in the case of present proceedings, she was 
offered free legal aid which she refused to accept. Finally, in 
paras 15 and 16 it was observed that the respondent should be 
given opportunity to produce any material to substantiate her 
claim in case she has. Once deficiency in service is proved, the 
respondent is entitled to be suitably compensated. With respect 
to the question of quantum, the matter was remitted back to 
the Commission for affording opportunity to the respondent to 
lead evidence with regard to her claim. In case any evidence 
is led by the respondent, the appellant was also to be given 
adequate right to rebut the same. On the basis of the evidence 
so led, the Commission was to re-examine the matter afresh. 
8.	
It is in the light of the aforesaid observations made by this Court 
that the evidence led by the respondent to justify her claim is to be 
examined.
9.	
It may be relevant to add here that in the complaint filed by the 
respondent initially, her claim was to the extent of ₹3,00,00,000/-. 
However, after the matter was remitted back to the Commission the 
claim of compensation was increased to ₹5,20,00,000/-. 
SECOND ROUND OF LITIGATION
10.	 After the matter was remanded back to the Commission, the 
respondent filed the affidavit dated 21.02.2023. We deem it 
appropriate to extract the contents of the same:
“I, AASHNA ROY D/O LATE SH. ANANTA LAL ROY 
R/O DDA HOUSING SOCIETY SECTOR E1, BLOCK 
F1 FLAT 64, 6TH FLOOR, VAANT KUNJ, NEW DELHI – 
110071, do hereby solemnly affirm & declare as under:-
1. That I am the deponent of the above said matter and 
I am well conversant with the fact and circumstances of 
the case and I am fully competent to swear the present 
affidavit of my behalf.

466
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2. I. say that the accompanying applications has been 
drafted by me and along with all the evidence and the 
contents of the same true to my knowledge and belief.”
11.	 A perusal of the aforesaid affidavit shows that it was a standard 
declaration made in isolation. Along with the aforesaid affidavit, 
the respondent had placed on record photocopies of the following 
documents:
"i.	
Email dated 08.02.2023 addressed by Mr. Goenka 
Pawan of Mahindra and copy of reply Email dated 
10.03.2018 addressed by the respondent.
ii.	
12 Messages between Mr. Rajeev Dubey, Mahindra 
and the respondent.
iii.	
Photo of the respondent after haircut (undated).
iv.	
Brief profile of Goenka who joined Mahindra in 
October 1993 as General Manager, R & D.
v.	
Additional Affidavit filed before the Supreme Court 
in compliance of Order dated 23.08.2022 in C.A. 
No.6391 of 2021 showing her loss under the different 
heads owing to the negligence of the appellant.
vi.	
Advertisement of Panteen in which picture of 
respondent appeared.
vii.	 Advertisement of VLCC in which picture of respondent 
appeared.
viii.	 Letter on plain paper addressed by Pranav Awasti, 
Director, Glitz Modelling & Production Pvt. Ltd. 
(undated) certifying that the respondent was offered 
feature films and has been modelled from 2015-2018.
ix.	
Letter on plain paper addressed by Mr. Jeet 
Surendranath, Partner Far Commercials, dated 
02.02.2018 to the respondent, offering haircare 
modelling assignment (Rs.50,00,000/- per annum) 
with a reputed haircare brand and for Fashion Features 
and Brand endorsements for a fees of Rs.20 lakhs.
x.	
Letter on plain paper addressed by Pranavi Awasti, 
Director, Glitz Modelling & Production Pvt. Ltd., dated 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
467
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
11.12.2017 to the respondent, offering proposal for 
Feature Film on remuneration of Rs.60,00,000/- for 
the second lead role.
xi.	
Prescription in the form of Letter dated 11.07.2018 
addressed by Dr. Ranajit Kumar Das where he stated 
that the respondent was suffering from mental trauma, 
depression and anxiety and also advised rest of 
duties for 30 working days in addition to prescription 
of medicines.
xii.	 Letter on plain paper addressed by Mr. Jeet 
Surendranath, Partner Far Commercials, dated 
13.02.2023 certifying that the respondent has 
performed as model in Pantene and VLCC in the 
year 2017 and 2018, featured in the short film 
“The Japanese Wife” and the respondent had been 
offered many fashion related projects and hair care 
advertisements.
xiii.	 Pay Slip for the month of May, 2018 of the respondent 
issued by A.M.C. Marketing Research Associates 
reflecting her designation as Sr. Director at a gross 
salary of Rs.4,67,468.
xiv.	 Pay Slip for the month of April, 2018 of the respondent 
issued by A.M.C. Marketing Research Associates 
reflecting her designation as Sr. Director at a gross 
salary of Rs.4,67,468.
xv.	
Certificate (undated) issued by the Glitz Modelling 
and Productions Pvt. Ltd. endorsing her affiliation 
with them and her work in well-known brands for 
advertisement and fashion shows and offer of feature 
films.”
12.	 The appellant replied to the aforesaid affidavit vide its affidavit dated 
16.03.2023, which contains a statement of denial of all documents 
filed by the respondent. 
13.	 Going in detail, though there was no pleading with reference to the 
documents annexed by the respondent in the affidavit filed by her, 
the appellant in the affidavit filed in response pleaded as under:

468
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“5. That the Opposite Party herein is filing the present 
reply to the application and the documents filed by the 
Complainant without prejudice to the fact that most of the 
documents supplied to the Opposite Party are dim and 
illegible, and without prejudice to the rights and contentions 
taken in the Review Petition filed in the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court, and subject to the outcome of the said Review 
Petition. The Opposite. Party reserves its rights to add to 
or alter its. response and file a detailed reply and additional 
documents, if required. It is submitted that the documents 
filed by the Complainant and supplied to the Opposite 
Party herein are mere photocopies and it is prayed that 
this Hon’ble Commission may be pleased to direct the 
Complainant to produce the originals of the documents filed 
by her before this Hon’ble Commission and an inspection 
thereof may be permitted to the Opposite Party.
x
x
x
8. It is submitted that the Complainant has sought to 
constantly improve her case and pleadings over the 
course of the proceedings in the present matter. In the 
original complaint and the rejoinder filed before this Hon’ble 
Commission, there were no pleadings, averments or 
allegations by the Complainant regarding any loss caused 
to the Complainant at all on any account whatsoever. The 
only allegation in the complaint was that the hair of the 
Complainant was cut short by the Opposite Party herein 
for commercial gain as the attempt was to sell the hair by 
the Opposite Party. It is submitted that the Complainant, 
having not even pleaded any loss in her complaint as is 
sought to be made out now, has subsequently sought to 
improve her case and has now filed certain documents 
pertaining to her alleged loss. It is the submission of the 
Opposite Parties herein that any evidence or document 
filed by the Complainant which is outside the scope of the 
original pleadings in the complaint is liable to be ignored 
and/or not permitted on the record of the case by this 
Hon’ble Commission.”
14.	 Learned counsel for the appellant had also referred to two applications 
filed by them before the Commission:

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
469
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
(i)	
praying for production of original documents;
(ii)	
seeking permission to cross-examine the respondent.
15.	 We had summoned the record of the Commission and found that 
the aforesaid two applications are available on record. 
16.	 The National Commission exercises original jurisdiction under Section 
22 of the 1986 Act. This section provides that the provisions of 
Sections 12, 13 and 14 of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder for 
disposal of complaints by the District Forum, with such modifications 
as may be considered necessary by the National Commission, will 
be applicable for disposal of disputes by the National Commission. 
Section 13 thereof deals with the procedure on admission of 
complaints before the District Forum.
17.	 It is well-settled that the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
(Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023) are not strictly applicable 
for proceedings under the 1986 Act. The Commission is, however, 
bound to comply with the Principles of Natural Justice, save and 
except as laid down in sub-section (4) of Section 13 of the 1986 Act. 
Reference can be made to para 43 of the judgment of this Court in 
Malay Kumar Ganguly v. Dr. Sukumar Mukherjee and others11:
“43. Apart from the procedures laid down in Sections 
12 and 13 as also the Rules made under the Act, the 
Commission is not bound by any other prescribed 
procedure. The provisions of the Evidence Act are not 
applicable. The Commission is merely to comply with 
the principles of natural justice, save and except the 
ones laid down under sub-section (4) of Section 13 
of the 1986 Act. The proceedings before the National 
Commission are although judicial proceedings, but at the 
same time it is not a civil court within the meaning of the 
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. It may have 
all the trappings of the civil court but yet it cannot be 
called a civil court. (See Bharat Bank Ltd. v. Employees 
and Nahar Industrial Enterprises Ltd. v. Hong Kong & 
Shanghai Banking Corpn.)”
11	
(2009) 9 SCC 221

470
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
17.1	 Judgment of this Court in Dr. J.J. Merchant and others v. 
Shrinath Chaturvedi12 deals with the issue as to how evidence 
is to be recorded before the Commission under the 1986 Act. 
The idea behind is that in the process, the proceedings should 
not be delayed. While trying a complaint the evidence of the 
parties could be taken on affidavits as provided in Section 13(4)
(iii). The Commission is also empowered to issue commission 
for examination of any witnesses in terms of Section 13(4)
(v) of the 1986 Act. It is akin to Order XVIII Rule 4 CPC, 
which also provides that in every case examination-in-chief 
of the witness shall be on affidavit. Further, witness could be 
examined by the court or the Commissioner appointed by it. 
The Commission also needs to follow the same system. In 
case the facts are taken in evidence and cross-examination 
is sought by the other side, the Commission can easily evolve 
a procedure permitting the other side to cross-examine the 
witnesses. The same can be done by putting certain questions 
in writing or through video conferencing or by appointment of 
a Commission. Relevant para 19 thereof is extracted below:
“19. It is true that it is the discretion of the Commission 
to examine the experts if required in an appropriate 
matter. It is equally true that in cases where it is 
deemed fit to examine experts, recording of evidence 
before a Commission may consume time. The Act 
specifically empowers the Consumer Forums to follow 
the procedure which may not require more time or 
delay the proceedings. The only caution required is 
to follow the said procedure strictly. Under the Act, 
while trying a complaint, evidence could be taken on 
affidavits [under Section 13(4)(iii)]. It also empowers 
such Forums to issue any commission for examination 
of any witness [under Section 13(4)(v)]. It is also to 
be stated that Rule 4 in Order 18 CPC is substituted 
which inter alia provides that in every case, the 
examination-in-chief of a witness shall be on affidavit 
and copies thereof shall be supplied to the opposite 
party by the party who calls him for evidence. It 
12	
(2002) 6 SCC 635

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
471
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
also provides that witnesses could be examined by 
the court or the Commissioner appointed by it. As 
stated above, the Commission is also empowered to 
follow the said procedure. Hence, we do not think 
that there is any scope of delay in examination or 
cross-examination of the witnesses. The affidavits 
of the experts including the doctors can be taken as 
evidence. Thereafter, if cross-examination is sought 
for by the other side and the Commission finds it 
proper, it can easily evolve a procedure permitting 
the party who intends to cross-examine by putting 
certain questions in writing and those questions also 
could be replied by such experts including doctors 
on affidavits. In case where stakes are very high and 
still a party intends to cross-examine such doctors or 
experts, there can be video conferences or asking 
questions by arranging telephonic conference and 
at the initial stage this cost should be borne by the 
person who claims such video conference. Further, 
cross-examination can be taken by the Commissioner 
appointed by it at the working place of such experts 
at a fixed time.”
17.2	 The enunciation of law by this Court in R.V.E. Venkatachala 
Gounder v. Arulmigu Viswesaraswami & V.P. Temple and 
another13 with reference to evidence to be led by the parties 
under the 1986 Act was quoted with the approval in a matter 
pertaining to Consumer Protection Act by this Court in Malay 
Kumar Ganguly (supra). Para 40 thereof is extracted below:
“40. This Court in R.V.E. Venkatachala Gounder v. 
Arulmigu Viswesaraswami & V.P. Temple held at SCC 
p. 764, para 20:
“20. … Ordinarily, an objection to the admissibility 
of evidence should be taken when it is tendered 
and not subsequently. The objections as to 
admissibility of documents in evidence may be 
classified into two classes: (i) an objection that 
13	
(2003) 8 SCC 752

472
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the document which is sought to be proved is 
itself inadmissible in evidence; and (ii) where the 
objection does not dispute the admissibility of the 
document in evidence but is directed towards the 
mode of proof alleging the same to be irregular 
or insufficient. In the first case, merely because 
a document has been marked as ‘an exhibit’, an 
objection as to its admissibility is not excluded 
and is available to be raised even at a later 
stage or even in appeal or revision. In the latter 
case, the objection should be taken when the 
evidence is tendered and once the document 
has been admitted in evidence and marked as 
an exhibit, the objection that it should not have 
been admitted in evidence or that the mode 
adopted for proving the document is irregular 
cannot be allowed to be raised at any stage 
subsequent to the marking of the document as 
an exhibit. The latter proposition is a rule of fair 
play. The crucial test is whether an objection, 
if taken at the appropriate point of time, would 
have enabled the party tendering the evidence 
to cure the defect and resort to such mode of 
proof as would be regular. The omission to 
object becomes fatal because by his failure the 
party entitled to object allows the party tendering 
the evidence to act on an assumption that the 
opposite party is not serious about the mode 
of proof. On the other hand, a prompt objection 
does not prejudice the party tendering the 
evidence, for two reasons: firstly, it enables the 
court to apply its mind and pronounce its decision 
on the question of admissibility then and there; 
and secondly, in the event of finding of the court 
on the mode of proof sought to be adopted going 
against the party tendering the evidence, the 
opportunity of seeking indulgence of the court 
for permitting a regular mode or method of proof 
and thereby removing the objection raised by the 
opposite party, is available to the party leading 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
473
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
the evidence. Such practice and procedure is 
fair to both the parties. Out of the two types 
of objections, referred to hereinabove, in the 
latter case, failure to raise a prompt and timely 
objection amounts to waiver of the necessity 
for insisting on formal proof of a document, the 
document itself which is sought to be proved 
being admissible in evidence. In the first case, 
acquiescence would be no bar to raising the 
objection in a superior court.”
(emphasis in original)
18.	 While remanding the case back to the Commission, in the earlier round 
of litigation, this Court had specifically observed that ‘quantification 
of compensation has to be based upon material evidence and not 
on the mere asking’. 
ANALYSIS
19.	 We may add here that whatever documents the respondent produced 
along with her affidavit were in the form of photocopies. None of the 
authors of those documents was summoned nor did the respondent 
get a commission issued for examination of those witnesses. In case 
any witness was produced, the appellant would have opportunity to 
cross-examine the same regarding veracity of the documents and/
or the contents thereof. 
20.	 Despite denial of all the documents filed by the respondent in 
evidence to claim damages, the respondent did not take any steps 
to prove the authenticity thereof. Some of the documents are prior 
to the relevant date, namely, when the respondent had a haircut in 
a salon in the hotel managed by the appellant, whereas some are 
later in time. The manner in which the photocopies thereof are sought 
were produced do not inspire confidence specially where the claim 
of damages is made for crores of rupees. From the evidence placed 
on record, a case is not made out for such a huge compensation 
to the respondent.
21.	 At the time of hearing, the appellant had referred to each and every 
document produced by the respondent along with the affidavit and 
pointed out the discrepancies therein. The idea was to raise an 

474
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
argument that none of the documents produced by the respondent 
could be relied upon to award her compensation to the tune of 
₹5,20,00,000/- as sought to be claimed by her or justify award of 
₹2,00,00,000/-. It is in the form of a table filed along with the written 
note on behalf of the appellant.
“Documents relied upon by the Respondent and Rebuttal of the 
Appellant to the Documents
Date 
Document 
filed by 
Respondent
Original/
Photo-copy
Appellant’s rebuttal
On Existing Job/Loss of Job
May, 
2018 
April, 
2018
Pay-Slip from 
one AMC 
Marketing 
Research 
Associates 
indicating 
that her net 
salary is INR 
3.53 lakh 
Pay-Slip from 
one AMC 
Marketing 
Research 
Associates 
indicating 
that her net 
salary is IN 
3.53 lakh 
Photo-copy
Photo-copy
The Pay-slip does 
not indicate when the 
Respondent quit her 
job (if at all she did 
quit). It further does 
not indicate why she 
quit her job. There 
is no causal link 
shown to the haircut 
received by her.
On the contrary, the 
Pay-Slip indicates 
that she was gainfully 
employed before and 
after the haircut.
The Respondent 
has not produced 
payslips for other 
months. This apart, 
even assuming that 
thepay-slips are 
legitimate, it would 
not amount to INR 1 
crore per annum, as 
claimed.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
475
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
10.03.18
E-Mail from 
Mr. Pawan 
Goenka 
informing the 
Respondent 
that she is 
‘good fit’ 
for a senior 
level position 
in Delhi 
for which 
Mr. Rajeev 
Dubey will 
get in touch 
to ‘possibly 
organize a 
meeting’
Photo-copy 
The E-mail does not 
indicate any specifics 
of the job
that she was 
purportedly offer, 
particularly the salary.
There is no evidence 
to show that 
any official offer 
was made to the 
Respondent herein 
with any details.
There is no evidence 
presented to show 
that she lost out on 
this job opportunity 
purely due to the 
hair-cut.
09.04.18
E-Mail dated 
09.04.2018 
from Mr. 
Rajeev 
Dubey 
informing the 
Respondent 
to meet at 11 
AM without 
specifying 
the date. It 
is indicated 
to her to 
recheck 
before 
21.04.2018
Photo-copy 
The e-mail does 
not indicate any 
formalized meeting 
or offer made to 
the Respondent, 
particularly the 
financial details.
The emails/
messages filed are 
incomplete. No offer/
interview letter has 
been produced.

476
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
On Modelling Assignments
-
Photographs 
from 
purported 
modelling 
assignments
Photo-copy
Photographs are un-
dated and no proof 
of receipt of payment 
qua these specific 
advertisements are 
shown to prove any 
legitimacy.
-
Certificate 
from one 
M/s Glitz 
Modelling and 
Production 
Pvt. Ltd. 
indicating 
that the 
Respondent 
had modelled 
from 2015-
2018 and 
was offered 
feature films.
Photo-copy
The Certificate 
is undated and 
further, no details or 
monetary aspects 
are mentioned in the 
Certificate.
The money, if any, 
received from such 
assignments have 
not been proven 
by the Respondent 
through any pay-slip, 
like she has sought 
to do with her salary.
11.12.17
Certificate 
dated 
11.12.2017 
from M/s Glitz 
Modelling and 
Production 
Pvt. Ltd. 
proposing 
a second 
lead role in 
a feature film 
for which the 
remuneration 
would be INR 
60 lakh.
Photo-copy
The Certificate does 
not contain any 
details or specifics 
and does not provide 
any evidence 
regarding her offer. 
No terms and 
conditions relating 
the alleged role are 
set out.
The Certificate is a 
photocopy and the 
authenticity of which 
is under cloud.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
477
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
The role was 
offered to her, even 
assuming that it was, 
in December, 2017 
which was much 
prior to the haircut. 
No nexus is shown 
between the loss of 
assignment and the 
haircut.
02.02.18
Certificate 
from Mr. Jeet 
Surendranath 
[Partner Far 
Commercials] 
offering the 
Respondent 
an annual 
modelling 
assignment 
with a 
reputed 
haircare 
brand and 
other brand 
campaigns 
for IN 50 
lakh
Photo-copy
The document is 
illegible and unclear 
as to whether it is on 
some letterhead.
The Certificate does 
not indicate any 
details regarding 
said modelling 
assignments.
No agreed terms and 
conditions mentioned 
relating the said 
alleged assignment.
There is no proof of 
payment made, if 
any, from any of the 
assignments
11.07.18
Certificate 
from doctor 
dated 
11.07.2018 
stating that 
the Appellant 
is under 
medical 
examination 
and that she
Photo-copy
The Doctor is not 
qualified to provide 
such a certificate. 
Certificate is from 
the same doctor who 
had allegedly treated 
the Respondent for 
scalp disorder. The 
certificate is of July 
2018 and was

478
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
is suffering 
from mental 
trauma, 
depression 
and anxiety
never filed before 
by the Respondent, 
either in the original 
Complaint or before 
this Hon’ble Court.
The certificate 
mentions that “She 
should be relieved 
of his duties for 
30days.”
The Respondent’s 
contention that she 
was in modelling 
for hair-products 
also belied by 
these certificates 
as the doctor 
who issued these 
certificates was not a 
dermatologist.
13.02.23
Certificate 
dated 
13.02.2023 
from Mr. Jeet 
Surendernath 
[Partner Far 
Commercials] 
indicating 
that the 
Respondent 
has modelled 
in various 
advertisements 
for Pantene 
and VLCC 
and has 
featured in 
some short 
films
Photo-copy
The Certificate does 
not indicate any 
details regarding 
said modelling 
assignments.
The details of the 
cast of the film on 
IMDB does not show 
the name of the 
Respondent.
There is no proof of 
payment made, if 
any, from any of the 
assignments.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
479
ITC Limited v. Aashna Roy
22.	 The damages cannot be awarded merely on presumptions or whims 
and fancies of the complainant. To make out a case for award of 
damages, especially when the claim is to the tune of crores of 
rupees, some trustworthy and reliable evidence has to be led. It is 
not a case where the Commission was considering a small issue 
where compensation could be awarded by applying a thumb rule. 
Claim of compensation was for crores of rupees, for which some 
loss suffered by the respondent because of deficiency in service was 
required to be established. This could not be established by merely 
producing photocopies of the documents. Even the discrepancies in 
the photocopies produced on record by the respondent, as pointed 
out by the appellant, have been noticed above. Thus, even after 
remand, respondent has not been able to make out a case for award 
of such huge compensation.
23.	 In our view, on the basis of photocopies of the documents placed on 
record by the respondent, the Commission has committed an error in 
awarding huge amount of compensation of ₹2,00,00,000/-, which in 
our view cannot be justified. The observation made by the Commission 
that because of the trauma suffered by the respondent, she may not 
have maintained the originals of the documents produced before the 
Commission, hence, reliance could be placed on mere photocopies, 
cannot be a justification for awarding such a huge compensation. 
Even if the photocopies were to be produced, there are other ways 
and means to justify the claim made on that basis. Even if the Code 
of Civil Procedure may not be strictly applicable, the Commission has 
not assessed as to how the respondent suffered loss to the tune of 
₹2,00,00,000/-. General discussion in the impugned judgment may 
not justify the same.
23.1	 The fact remains that in the earlier round of litigation, the 
appellant had deposited a sum of ₹25,00,000/- in this Court. 
While deciding the appeal14 and remitting the case back to the 
Commission, this Court had directed for transmission of the 
said amount to it. While deciding the complaint in the second 
round of litigation, the Commission had directed release of the 
aforesaid amount in favor of the respondent.
14	
Civil Appeal No.6931 of 2021

480
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
24.	 For the reasons mentioned above, the present appeal is partially 
allowed. The impugned order passed by the Commission is modified to 
the extent that the amount of compensation, to which the respondent 
is entitled to, shall be restricted to the amount already released in 
her favor. 
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
