[2026] 2 S.C.R. 352 : 2026 INSC 118
Mohtashem Billah Malik
v.
Sana Aftab
(Civil Appeal No. 771 of 2026)
04 February 2026
[Pankaj Mithal* and S.V.N. Bhatti, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the dispute regarding the custody of two minor 
sons born to the appellant-husband and the respondent-wife.
Headnotes†
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 – s.25 – Custody of minors – 
Appellant-husband and respondent-wife, both Indian citizen 
married under Muslim Personal Law and shifted to Qatar – 
Matrimonial dispute between them, culminating in divorce and 
the custody of the minors given to the wife while guardianship 
given to the husband by the Qatar court – Allegedly, the wife 
removed the minors from Qatar to India during their academic 
session, without the knowledge and consent of the husband, 
without obtaining the original passports, and without prior 
permission from Qatar Courts – Thereafter, husband filed 
habeas corpus petition as also petition u/s.25 seeking custody 
of the minor – Family court granted custody to the father – 
However, the High Court set aside the same and granted 
custody to the mother – Correctness:
Held: In matters of custody, the paramount consideration is the 
welfare of the children but nonetheless there are other factors-
conduct of the parties, their financial capacity, their standard of 
living, as well as the comfort and education of the children which 
weigh before the court while passing the final order of custody – 
Thus, not correct on the part of the High Court in holding that such 
factors not very relevant and that the custody of the minors has 
to depend upon their welfare alone – High Court while granting 
the custody to respondent-wife did not consider the effect and 
* Author

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
353
Mohtashem Billah Malik v. Sana Aftab
impact of the conduct of the respondent-wife having travelled and 
moved the minors to India without the permission of the Court, 
and without the consent of the appellant-father, who was guardian 
and without obtaining the original passports from him but rather by 
procuring fake or duplicate or fresh passports; failed to consider 
the order of the Qatar Court revoking the custody order in favour 
of the respondent-wife; order of the Contempt Court holding the 
respondent-wife guilty of committing contempt of the court for 
violation of her own undertaking given to the High Court that she 
will return to Qatar for the continuation of the minor’s education but 
travelled alone leaving the minors behind in India; the Qatar Court 
order giving clean chit to husband as regards conviction for assault; 
and the findings recorded by the Family Court, Srinagar indicating 
that the minor children had shown inclination to accompany the 
appellant-father to Qatar as also the mediation report, that both 
children appearing comfortable with the prospect of being without 
their mother – While these aspects may not, by themselves, be 
the sole reason for determining custody, they are nevertheless 
necessary and relevant factors, and their cumulative effect was at 
least relevant for determining the custody arrangement – Impugned 
judgment and order passed by the High Court cannot be sustained 
in law and is set aside – Matter remanded to the High Court for 
reconsideration. [Paras 22-33]
List of Acts
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890.
List of Keywords
Custody of two minor sons; Custody of minors; Muslim Personal 
Law; Matrimonial dispute; Divorce; Guardianship; Qatar court; 
Original passports; Prior permission from Qatar Courts; Habeas 
corpus petition; Family court; Welfare of the children.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
771 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 08.09.2025 of the High Court 
of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh at Srinagar in FAO(MAT) No. 
01 of 2025

354
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Meenakshi Arora, Sr. Adv., Prosenjeet Banerjee, Ms. Nidhi 
Mohan Parashar, Soayib Qureshi, Vikrant Kumar.
Adv. for the Respondent(s):
Altaf Hussain Naik, Sr. Adv., Mrs. Shamama Anis, Atif Suhrawardy, 
Syed Mehdi Imam, Tashriq Ahmad, Tabrez Ahmad, Shabir Ahmad 
Najar, Ms. Saba Altaf, Pankaj Kumar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal is in relation to an unfortunate dispute regarding the 
custody of two minor sons namely Malik Karim Billah born on 
17.10.2017 and Malik Rahim Billah born on 04.11.2019 to the 
appellant-husband and the respondent-wife.
3.	
Both the appellant-husband and the respondent-wife are Indian 
citizens and are well educated. They were married on 28.07.2015 
in Srinagar in accordance with the Muslim Personal Law. As the 
appellant-husband was serving as an electrical engineer in Qatar 
since 2013, both of them started residing at Qatar immediately after 
the marriage where the aforesaid two sons were born to them out 
of the wedlock.
4.	
Sometime later, on account of matrimonial discord, both of them 
preferred separate divorce petitions, namely, Case No.882/20211 
and Case No.1300/20212 before the Family Court at Qatar. Both 
the petitions were decided by a common judgment and order dated 
29.03.2022 and a decree of judicial divorce based on mutual abuse 
was granted. The appellant-husband was directed to pay alimony, 
enjoyment compensation, monthly child support, custodian payment 
and for payment of custodian accommodation. The custody of the 
1	
Mohtashem Billah Malik Mohamed v. Sanaa Aftab
2	
Sanaa Aftab v. Mohtashem Billah Malek Mohamed

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
355
Mohtashem Billah Malik v. Sana Aftab
minors was given to the respondent-wife while guardianship was 
given to the appellant-husband. At the same time, the appellant-
husband was directed to deliver all personal documents of the minors 
to the respondent-wife including their IDs, Medical Certificates, Birth 
Certificates and any evidential documents of the children except 
the passports which were to remain in the custody of the appellant-
husband being the guardian of the minors. 
5.	
However, the respondent-wife travelled to India on 17/18.08.2022 by 
procuring fresh passports for the children or probably on the basis 
of duplicate or otherwise and started residing at Srinagar. Allegedly, 
the respondent-wife removed the minors from Qatar to India during 
their academic session, without the knowledge and consent of the 
appellant-husband, and without obtaining the original passports etc. 
or without prior permission from Qatar Courts. 
6.	
The appellant-husband filed Habeas Corpus Writ Petition (Crl) 
No.636/2022 before the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh 
at Srinagar alleging that his minor sons are in illegal custody of the 
respondent-wife. 
7.	
The aforesaid writ petition gave rise to LPA No.216/20223. The said 
LPA was disposed of on 01.12.2022 in the light of the statement 
made by the respondent-wife who was present in court and which 
was even reduced to writing and placed on record that she will go 
back to Qatar well before the reopening of the school of the elder 
son Malik Karim Billah on or before 02.01.2023 so that his education 
may not suffer and that she will undertake all necessary steps for 
obtaining residency permit for her younger son Malik Rahim Billah.
8.	
The aforesaid appeal having been disposed of in terms of the above 
statement, gave finality to the undertaking of the respondent-wife. 
The respondent-wife, for reasons best known to her, failed to keep 
her undertaking. She visited Qatar in the third week of December, 
2022 but did not take the minors along with her.
9.	
In view of the violation of the aforesaid undertaking, the appellant-
husband applied for the revocation of the custody of the minors 
which was given to the respondent-wife before the Qatar court. The 
said custody order of the minors in favour of the respondent-wife 
3	
Mohtashem Billah Malik v. Union of India and Ors.

356
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
was revoked by the Qatar court on 31.10.2023 and the custody was 
ordered to be given to the appellant-husband. Thus, the custody of 
the minors in favour of the respondent-wife was terminated.
10.	 The appellant-husband simultaneously initiated proceedings for 
contempt in Srinagar vide CCP(D) No.4/2023 against the respondent-
wife for violating the undertaking given by her on 01.02.2022 before 
the Division Bench in the LPA. The Contempt Court vide Order dated 
06.08.2024 held the respondent-wife to be guilty of not honouring the 
commitment given by her to the court and for not even expressing 
any remorse for her conduct. Therefore, the court held her guilty of 
committing contempt of the court and sentenced her with a token 
fine of Rs.100/- to be deposited with the Registrar Judicial of the 
court within one month. She was issued warning to remain careful 
and conscious in future while making any statement and giving 
undertaking to the court. Since the LPA was disposed of in terms 
of the undertaking which has been violated by her, the LPA was 
ordered to be restored for consideration on merits. 
11.	 This being the background, the appellant-husband initiated fresh 
proceedings before Family Court, Srinagar under Section 25 of the 
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, seeking custody of the two minor 
children. The Family Court on 02.01.2025 allowed the petition and 
granted custody of the minors to the appellant-husband. The said 
order of the Family Court has been reversed by the High Court in 
appeal preferred by the respondent-wife vide judgment and order 
dated 08.09.2025.
12.	 Under challenge in this appeal is the aforesaid judgment and order 
of the High Court dated 08.09.2025 by which the order of the Family 
Court granting custody of the minors to the appellant-husband has 
been set aside and the custody has been ordered to be restored to 
the respondent-wife.
13.	 We have heard Ms. Meenakshi Arora, senior counsel for the 
appellant-husband and Mr. Altaf Hussain Naik, senior counsel for 
the respondent-wife.
14.	 Ms. Meenakshi Arora, senior counsel appearing for the appellant-
husband had argued that the respondent-wife had removed the 
minors from Qatar in the middle of their academic session. The 
elder son Malik Karim Billah at the relevant time was studying in 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
357
Mohtashem Billah Malik v. Sana Aftab
the Qatar International School4 (a Gold Standard British Curriculam 
School) and the younger son Malik Rahim Billah in the Grandma 
British Nursery School. They travelled to India leaving their education 
in between on 17/18th August 2022. The respondent-wife misled the 
court by alleging that she had admitted the minors in a school i.e. 
Foundation Word School in Srinagar. She even produced documents 
claiming that Malik Karim Billah was studying at Alama Iqbal Institute 
of Education, Srinagar in Class II. However, the admission form of 
Delhi Public School5 reveal that the elder son Malik Karim Billah 
who was admitted there on 19.03.2024 had last attended QIS, 
Qatar, before being admitted to DPS in Class I, and the children 
were never admitted to Alama Iqbal Institute of Education, Srinagar, 
which happened to be a school run by the relatives of respondent-
wife. The very fact that the respondent-wife removed the children 
from the school at Qatar in between the session and admitted them 
in DPS only in March 2024, means that for two years the children 
were not sent to any school. 
15.	 It is also argued that even in DPS the attendance of the children is 
only about 60% as against the mandatory requirement of 75%. The 
said conduct of the respondent-wife making the education of the 
children suffer disentitles her the custody of the minors. A further 
argument was made that in view of the various precedents of this 
Court, a parent who is indulging in doing a wrong by removing a child 
from a school mid-session and shifting to another country cannot 
take advantage of his/ her own wrongdoing. 
16.	 The second argument of Ms. Meenakshi Arora is that the children, 
especially the elder one is quite grown up and capable of taking an 
intelligent decision. Therefore, in view of the report of the counselor 
of the Family Court submitted in the contempt proceedings who had 
met the children a number of times and opined that the children had 
a more comfortable relationship with the father, coupled with the fact 
that even the witnesses produced by the respondent-wife admitted 
that the children were not comfortable in Srinagar and were unhappy 
to continue to live there. The custody ought to be restored to the 
appellant-father and the minors be allowed to travel to Qatar with him. 
4	
In short ‘QIS’
5	
In short ‘DPS’

358
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
17.	 She next argued that not only the conduct of the respondent-wife, 
but also failure on her part to furnish any plausible explanation for 
shifting the children mid-session from Qatar to Srinagar, and that 
too without obtaining the consent of the appellant-husband and the 
original passports from him, is sufficient enough to disentitle her to 
the custody of the minors.
18.	 Lastly, she submitted that the work schedule of the respondent-
wife clearly shows that she is required to travel to different parts of 
India in connection with her work, thereby leaving the children and 
their education at stake, and hence, tilts the scale of custody of the 
minors in favour of the appellant-husband, who has a flexible work 
schedule with an option to work from home enabling him to take 
care of the minors himself.
19.	 Per contra, Shri Altaf Hussain Naik, senior counsel appearing for 
the respondent-wife, submitted that there is no error or illegality in 
the judgement and order passed by the High Court, as in matters of 
custody the paramount interest is the welfare of the children and the 
High Court has repeatedly emphasized that the welfare of the children 
is best served in the hands and care of the respondent-wife. He 
further submitted that the financial capacity of the appellant-husband 
or the conduct of the respondent-wife is not very material while 
deciding the custody of the children, as the welfare and interest of 
the minors outweighs all these aspects. He lastly submitted that both 
the children are settled and studying in a reputed school in Srinagar 
and that their annual progress report is more than satisfactory, and 
thus it cannot be said that their education is lacking in any manner 
or is suffering on account of their shifting from Qatar to India.
20.	 The High Court while passing the impugned judgement has proceeded 
on the premise that the Family Court had restored the custody of the 
minors to the appellant-father primarily on the conduct of the parties, 
the standard of living and income of the parents, and lastly, on the 
age and gender of the minors and the preference shown by them. 
The High Court held that none of the above aspects are relevant 
for deciding the custody of the minors and that the paramount 
consideration is only the welfare of the children. 
21.	 The High Court further recorded that, although the minors may have 
exhibited an inclination to stay with their father and to accompany 
him to Qatar, much importance cannot be attached to such gestures 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
359
Mohtashem Billah Malik v. Sana Aftab
of the children, as after the conclusion of the hearing and reserving 
the judgement, the Court had interacted with the minors in chambers 
for about 40 minutes (in the absence of the parents) and noticed 
that the elder child did not express any resentment towards either 
of the parents. Further, in response to the query as to who would 
look after him while in Qatar, the elder child responded by saying 
that probably a maid would do so. As such, the Court went on to 
hold that the inclination of the children was also not very clear as 
to whether they wished to accompany the appellant-father to Qatar. 
22.	 We have gone through the entire judgement and order passed by 
the High Court in the light of the submissions advanced by the 
parties and have also perused the documents on record. What we 
clearly notice from the above is that there is no dispute with the 
proposition that in matters of custody, the paramount consideration 
is the welfare of the children but nonetheless there are a host of 
other factors which weigh before the court while passing the final 
order of custody. These host of factors may include the conduct of 
the parties, their financial capacity, their standard of living, as well 
as the comfort and education of the children. Therefore, it may not 
be entirely correct on the part of the High Court in holding that such 
factors are not very relevant and that the custody of the minors has 
to depend upon their welfare alone.
23.	 The High Court while writing the opinion had referred to the fact 
that the respondent-wife had travelled and moved the minors to 
India without the consent of the appellant-father, who was guardian 
and without obtaining the original passports from him but rather by 
procuring fake or duplicate or fresh passports while original already 
existed for travel purposes. However, the court below has not 
considered the effect and impact of this conduct while granting the 
custody to the respondent-wife. 
24.	 We are of the opinion that the impact of the aforesaid conduct of the 
respondent-wife was a material aspect which ought to have been 
considered by the High Court while passing the order of the custody.
25.	 Secondly, the High Court completely failed to consider the impact 
of the judgement and order of the Qatar Court dated 31.10.2023, 
by which the custody order in favour of the respondent-wife was 
revoked for the reason that she misconducted herself by removing 
the children from the jurisdiction of the Court, and that too without 

360
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the consent of the appellant-father and the permission of the Court. 
The revocation of the order of custody was a crucial material for the 
purpose of determining the custody of the children. In fact, there was 
no subsisting order of custody of children in favour of the respondent-
wife; rather, there was an order in favour of the appellant-husband 
appointing him as the guardian of the minors. All these aspects 
were highly relevant for passing an order of custody of the minors. 
26.	 Thirdly, the Court below also ignored the impact of the order of the 
Contempt Court holding the respondent-wife guilty of committing 
contempt of the court for violation of her own undertaking given to the 
High Court on 01.12.2022 that she will return to Qatar by 02.01.2023 
for the continuation of the minor’s education but travelled alone 
leaving the minors behind in India, which had led to the disposal of 
the LPA without consideration on merits. 
27.	 The aforesaid contempt order has attained finality and is conclusive, 
and as such, the respondent-wife cannot resile from her guilty conduct. 
28.	 Lastly, in a criminal case regarding abuse and assault filed against 
the appellant-husband the Qatar Court had given a clean chit to 
him and there is no subsisting conviction for assault, which clearly 
demonstrates that the misconduct as alleged against him has not 
been proved so as to disentitle him from the company of the children.
29.	 Apart from the above, not only the findings recorded by the Family 
Court, Srinagar indicate that the minor children had shown inclination 
to accompany the appellant-father to Qatar, but the mediation report 
placed before this Court also contains material observations which 
bear directly on the issue of custody.
30.	 As per the mediation report, both children expressed an inclination 
towards joining their father. Though they had limited or no conscious 
memory of life in Qatar, where they were born, they nonetheless 
conveyed a desire to explore and reside there. When specifically 
asked as to who would look after them in Qatar, the elder child 
stated that the presence of his father would be sufficient and that 
someone would inevitably be available to care for them. Both children 
appeared comfortable with the prospect of being without their mother. 
The younger child repeatedly expressed his wish to go with the 
father and was visibly distressed during the interaction. It was also 
recorded that both children speak only English, and found difficulty 
in conversing with local children. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
361
Mohtashem Billah Malik v. Sana Aftab
31.	 The High Court has completely ignored the aforesaid material and 
crucial aspects while passing the impugned order. While these 
aspects may not, by themselves, be the sole reason for determining 
custody, they are nevertheless necessary and relevant factors, and 
their cumulative effect was at least relevant for determining the 
custody arrangement.
32.	 In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we are of the 
opinion that the impugned judgement and order dated 08.09.2025 
passed by the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh cannot 
be sustained in law and is liable to be set aside. 
33.	 Accordingly, it is hereby set aside and the matter is remanded to 
the High Court for reconsideration on its own merits in accordance 
with the law most expeditiously, preferably within a period of four 
months from the day a certified copy of this order is placed before 
the court concerned.
34.	 The Civil Appeal is allowed with no order as to costs. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
