[2026] 2 S.C.R. 596 : 2026 INSC 143
N. Manoharan, Etc.
v.
The Administrative Officer and Another
(Civil Appeal No(s). 1513-1522 of 2026)
11 February 2026
[Pankaj Mithal and S.V.N. Bhatti,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the employees of Heavy Water Plant, Department of Atomic 
Energy, Government of India, Tuticorin (“HWP”) are covered by 
the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
Headnotes†
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 – CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 – 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 – s.2(e) – Retired employees 
of HWP employees governed by the CCS (Pension) Rules, 
1972 claimed higher gratuity benefits under the PG Act – 
Controlling Authority held that the provisions of the PG 
Act are attracted to the employees of HWP, and directed to 
pay the difference of gratuity between the PG Act and CCS 
(Pensions) Rules, 1972 – HWP filed appeal before the Deputy 
Chief Labour Commissioner, dismissed – Writ Petitions filed 
by HWP, dismissed – In appeal, High Court held that since the 
Appellants held “civil posts under the Central Government” 
and were governed by the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, which 
provide for gratuity, they fall squarely within the exclusion 
clause and therefore, do not come within the meaning of 
“employees” u/s.2(e), PG Act – Interference, if warranted:
Held: No, impugned order agreed with – The exclusionary limb 
of s.2(e) begins with the words “but does not include” any such 
person who holds a post under the Central Government; a State 
Government; is governed by any other Act or; by any Rules providing 
payment of gratuity – HWP is created to manage the projects of the 
Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) for the production of heavy 
water – HWP at Tuticorin is a project under the management of the 
Heavy Water Projects Board of the DAE, and cannot, by sieving, 
* Author

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
597
N. Manoharan, Etc. v. The Administrative Officer and Another
separate itself from being an ancillary or adjunct of the DAE – 
For the limited purpose of gratuity, the larger and comprehensive 
establishment of atomic energy facilities by the Central Government 
is not replaced with a very narrow construction of the functional 
freedom given to the Heavy Water Projects Board or individual 
Heavy Water Plants – HWP is an adjunct or ancillary operating 
through the Heavy Water Projects Board of the DAE – Constitution, 
establishment, and continuation examined, HWP is an adjunct of 
the Department of Atomic Energy – Therefore, the employees fall 
within the exclusionary clause of s.2(e) of the PG Act – Thus, ss.5 
and 14 are not attracted in deciding on the applicability of the PG 
Act to the employees of HWP. [Paras 12-14]
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 – s.3 – High Court inter alia held that 
Heavy Water Board (HWB) functions directly under the Ministry 
and the employees were Central Government servants, not 
merely employees of an autonomous industrial unit:
Held: The Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, is 
the Department through which the Central Government discharges 
the functions, duties, and responsibilities assigned to it under 
the AE Act – s.3 inter-alia empowers the Central Government to 
produce, develop, use and dispose of Atomic Energy, either by 
itself or through any Authority or Corporation established by it or 
a Government Company, and carry out research into any matters 
connected therewith – Similarly, to manufacture or to produce any 
prescribed radioactive substance or the ancillary works connected 
therewith, the difference in language between Clauses (a) and (b) 
of s.3 clearly demonstrate that a few of the functions/activities, the 
Central Government is empowered to do by itself or through any 
other authority or corporation established by it or a Government 
Company, and has power to manufacture or otherwise produce 
any prescribed or radioactive substance as per Clause (b) – There 
is a choice vested in the Central Government to undertake a 
particular act either directly or by establishing a company/PSU – 
Since its inception, a board has been constituted to manage the 
HWPs of the DAE – The retired employees admit that HWP is 
not incorporated under the Companies Act, is not recognised as 
a PSU, or functions as a Government Company – Thus, the other 
attributes of a separate legal entity, incorporated association, 
artificial person, limited liability, common seal, perpetual succession, 
and transferability of shares are not present. [Paras 4, 12.1]

598
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Interpretation of Statutes – Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 – 
s.2(e) – “means” and “does not include”:
Held: The applicability or inapplicability of the PG Act depends 
on whether the employee comes within the inclusive definition or 
the exclusive definition – The same is dependent on jurisdictional 
facts – The exclusionary limb of s.2(e) begins with the words “but 
does not include” any such person (i) who holds a post under the 
Central Government, (ii) a State Government, (iii) is governed by any 
other Act or (iv) by any Rules providing payment of gratuity – The 
exclusionary clause, if read by applying the golden rule excludes 
employees of the Central and State Governments from the meaning 
of “employee” under the PG Act – It also excludes a person who 
is governed by any other act – Even if it is used as “or” but not 
as “and”, it excludes any such person who is governed by any 
other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity – The 
provision contains the words both “means” and “does not include” – 
Coupling the word “means” with “includes” denotes an exhaustive 
definition – Conversely, the word “means” and “does not include” 
should be read as exclusionary language that strictly excludes 
the scope of the provision from certain classes – Consequently, 
a person who is governed by any other Act, or governed by any 
Rules providing for payment of gratuity, does not come within the 
ambit of the definition of “employee” under the PG Act – Atomic 
Energy Act, 1962 – CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972. [Para 12]
Jurisdictional fact – What is:
Held: A jurisdictional fact is a fact which must exist before a court, 
tribunal, or authority assumes jurisdiction over a particular matter – A 
jurisdictional fact is one on the existence or non-existence of which 
depends the jurisdiction of a court, a tribunal or an authority – It 
is the fact upon which an administrative agency’s power to act 
depends – If the jurisdictional fact does not exist, the court, authority 
or officer cannot act – If a court or authority wrongly assumes the 
existence of such a fact, the order can be questioned by a writ of 
certiorari – The underlying principle is that by erroneously assuming 
the existence of such a jurisdictional fact, no authority can confer 
upon itself jurisdiction which it otherwise does not possess – In the 
present case, appointment orders or any other circulars for deciding 
the jurisdictional fact of “employees”, not adverted to. [Para 10]

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
599
N. Manoharan, Etc. v. The Administrative Officer and Another
Case Law Cited
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Dharam Prakash Sharma (1998) 
7 SCC 221 – distinguished.
Arun Kumar v. Union of India [2006] Supp. 6 SCR 290 : (2007) 1 
SCC 732; Mahalakshmi Oil Mills v. State of A.P. [1988] Supp. 2 
SCR 1088 : (1989) 1 SCC 164; P. Kasilingam and Others v. P.S.G 
College of Technology and Others [1995] 2 SCR 1061 : (1995) 
Supp. SCC 2 348 – referred to.
List of Acts
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972; Atomic Energy Act, 1962; CCS 
(Pension) Rules, 1972; Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
List of Keywords
Employees of Heavy Water Plant, Department of Atomic Energy, 
Government of India, Tuticorin are not covered by the provisions 
of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972; HWP; Section 2(e) of the 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972; Differential gratuity amounts; 
Retirement benefits; Gratuity; Department of Atomic Energy, 
Government of India; Jurisdictional fact; Heavy Water Boards; 
Heavy Water Projects Board of the DAE.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 1513-1522 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.06.2023 and 02.08.2023 
of the High Court of Judicature at Madras in WP No. 24935 of 
2021, and WP Nos. 7108, 14893, 697, 704, 9116, 8561, 13031, 
15909, and 14896 of 2023, respectively
With
Civil Appeal No(s). 1523-1554 and 1555 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Haripriya Padmanabhan, Sr. Adv., K. Paari Vendhan, 
Aayushman Aggarwal, Shrutanjay Bhardwaj, Raghunatha 
Sethupathy B, Siddhi Nagwekar.

600
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
S.D. Sanjay, A.S.G., Khushal Kolwar, Parthvi Ahuja, Ms. Nikita 
Sethi, Shubham Prakash Mishra, Akshsat Aggarwal, Ms. Arunima 
Diwedi, Rajeev Ranjan, Dharmendra Kumar Pandey, Raman 
Yadav, Raj Bahadur Yadav, Gurmeet Singh Makker, Ms. Aurnima 
Diwedi, Rajeev Ranjan, Dharmendra Kumar Pandey, Raman Yadav, 
Saurabh Kumar Kaushik, Amrish Kumar.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
S.V.N. Bhatti, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The point for consideration in the subject Civil Appeals is whether 
the employees of Heavy Water Plant, Department of Atomic Energy, 
Government of India, Tuticorin (“HWP”) are covered by the provisions 
of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 (“PG Act”). 
3.	
The Civil Appeals arise from a common Judgment dated 21.06.2023 
in Writ Appeal No. 1687 of 2021, Writ Petition No. 19117 and batch. 
The impugned Judgment held and declared that the employees of 
HWP are not covered by the definition of Section 2(e) of the PG Act. 
Hence, the Civil Appeals are at the instance of the retired employees 
of HWP. The circumstances leading to the dispute between the parties 
are admitted and fall within a narrow compass. 
4.	
The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 (“AE Act”), was enacted by the 
Parliament and is effective from 15.09.1962. The objective of the 
AE Act is to provide for the development, control and use of atomic 
energy for the welfare of the people of India and for other peaceful 
purposes. Section 3 of the AE Act deals with ‘General Powers of 
the Central Government’ to produce, develop, use and dispose of 
atomic energy, either by itself or through any Authority or Corporation 
established by it, or a Government Company; and carry out research 
into any materials connected therewith. Section 3 of the AE Act is 
comprehensive and encompasses all primary and ancillary activities 
undertaken by the Central Government relating to atomic energy. 
The Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India (“DAE”), is 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
601
N. Manoharan, Etc. v. The Administrative Officer and Another
the Department through which the Central Government discharges 
the functions, duties, and responsibilities assigned to it under the 
AE Act. The parties admit the following hierarchy of departments 
vis-à-vis atomic energy: 
5.	
On 01.05.1969, the Government of India/DAE issued Office 
Memorandum No. 12/7/69-(P) for the constitution of a Board to 
administer the Heavy Water Production Projects of the DAE. The 
operative portion of the Office Memorandum reads as follows: 

602
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
6.	
The HWP in Tuticorin is one of the Heavy Water Boards established 
by the DAE. The circumstance precipitating a dispute between the 
retired employees and HWP can be traced to one of the pension 
payment orders issued by HWP. On 25.07.2014, the pension payment 
order in favour of retired employee, N. Manoharan, was issued 
under the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972. The CCS (Pension) Rules, 
1972 deal with comprehensively the retirement benefits to which a 
retired employee is entitled, including gratuity. The sum payable as 
gratuity under the PG Act and CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, is less 
than the sum payable under the PG Act. This led to an employee 
of HWP filing an application before the Controlling Authority under 
the PG Act. The Controlling Authority held that the provisions of 
the PG Act are attracted to the employees of HWP, and a direction 
was ordered to pay the difference between the PG Act and CCS 
(Pensions) Rules, 1972. The Controlling Authority, on jurisdictional 
fact and the applicability of the PG Act, held that HWP, constitutes 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
603
N. Manoharan, Etc. v. The Administrative Officer and Another
an industry under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, making the 
applicant-employee eligible for coverage under Section 1(3)(b) of 
the PG Act. The Controlling Authority also relied on the Order dated 
29.01.2016 of the High Court of Madras in WP Nos. 23577 to 23579 
of 2015 and batch. HWP, Tuticorin, challenging the Order of the 
Controlling Authority, filed an appeal before the Deputy Chief Labour 
Commissioner, and the appeal filed was dismissed. The primacy of 
consideration of the appellate authority as well proceeds on the fact 
that HWP is an industry under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, and 
the employees are industrial employees covered by the first limb of 
Section 2(e) of the PG Act. 
7.	
HWP assailed the orders before the High Court in Writ Petition No. 
23127 of 2015 and batch, which were dismissed on 31.03.2016, 
resulting in the filing of Writ Appeal No. 1687 of 2021. The record 
discloses that HWP filed Writ Petition No. 13346 of 2023 and batch 
challenging the subsequent orders of the Controlling Authority 
directing payment of the difference of gratuity to the retired employees 
of HWP. The Division Bench of the High Court of Madras dealt with 
the Writ Appeals as lead cases and, by the Impugned Judgment, and 
allowed the Writ Appeals as well as Writ Petitions filed by HWP. The 
Impugned Judgment examined the issue under the following heads: 
(i)	
On Interpretation of “Employee” (Section 2(e) of PG Act, 1972): 
The Appellants were appointed by the Government of India, DAE. 
Their appointment orders clearly stated they were governed by 
“Central Civil Services Rules.” Since the Appellants held “civil 
posts under the Central Government” and were governed by 
the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, which provide for gratuity, 
they fall squarely within the exclusion clause. Therefore, they 
do not come within the meaning of “employees” under Section 
2(e) of the PG Act.
(ii)	
Inapplicability of Section 14 (Overriding Effect): Section 14 
applies only to persons who first qualify as “employees” under 
the PG Act. Since the retired employees were excluded at the 
threshold definition stage (Section 2(e)), they never entered 
the ambit of the PG Act. Consequently, Section 14 cannot be 
invoked to override the CCS (Pension) Rules in their case. 
Hence, a specific exclusion in the definition clause cannot be 
defeated by a general overriding clause.

604
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(iii)	 Status of the Heavy Water Board (“HWB”): It rejected the 
argument that the HWB is an industrial establishment/
autonomous body, distinct from the Central Government. It 
treated HWB as a unit of the DAE of the Government of India. 
It was held that, unlike a Public Sector Undertaking like NPCIL, 
which is a separate corporate entity, HWB functions directly 
under the Ministry. The employees are, therefore, Central 
Government servants, not merely employees of an autonomous 
industrial unit.
(iv)	 The Principle of Estoppel: The Appellants had already received 
their retirement benefits, including pension and gratuity, under 
the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, without protest at the time 
of retirement. An employee cannot claim benefits under two 
different statutes for the same purpose. Having accepted the 
benefits under the specific rules applicable to government 
servants, i.e., CCS Rules, they are estopped from turning 
around and claiming higher benefits under a general law, i.e., 
the PG Act, which expressly excludes them.
(v)	
Distinguishing Precedents (The MCD Case): Distinguishing 
this Court’s judgment in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. 
Dharam Prakash Sharma,1 it was held that the employees 
were undeniably “employees” of the Corporation, and the 
Corporation had merely adopted CCS Rules. Whereas in the 
present case, the retired employees were originally Central 
Government servants holding civil posts, which is a specific 
statutory exclusion not present in the MCD (supra).
(vi)	 Regarding Refund: The High Court ordered that employees 
who had already withdrawn the differential gratuity amounts 
deposited by the Management “need not return the money” and 
the Management cannot demand a refund of these amounts. 
For those employees (like the retired employees in the present 
Civil Appeals) who had not yet withdrawn the money, the High 
Court ordered that the amounts lying in the deposit must be 
returned to the Management.
8.	
Learned Senior Counsel, Ms. Haripriya Padmanabhan, argues that 
HWP is an industrial establishment. The orders constituting HWP 
1	
(1998) 7 SCC 22.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
605
N. Manoharan, Etc. v. The Administrative Officer and Another
confer complete autonomy to HWP to decide on the appointment 
of employees, and service conditions by which the employees are 
governed. HWP, as an entity, has adopted and applied the CCS 
(Pension) Rules, 1972. From the above circumstances, it cannot be 
gainsaid that the employees of HWP fall within the exclusive definition 
of “employee” under Section 2(e) of the PG Act. The absence of an 
exemption notification under Section 5 is a crucial factor in determining 
the applicability of the PG Act to HWP’s employees. The entities 
established as government companies/public sector undertakings 
have exemption notifications in their favour, or the public sector 
undertaking, as a corporate body, discharges the obligation under 
the PG Act. There is no exemption notification in the case at hand. 
The impugned judgment fell into a serious error by distinguishing 
the judgment in MCD (supra). Assuming without admitting that the 
retirement benefits are paid as per CCS Rules/CCS Pension Rules, 
unless it is established on all fours that the employees of HWP 
squarely fall within Section 2(e) of the PG Act, denial of gratuity 
under the PG Act is illegal, and the impugned judgment is liable to 
be set aside. 
9.	
Shree S.D. Sanjay, learned ASG appearing for HWP, argues that the 
standing of employees of HWP vis-à-vis HWP is, in more than one 
sense, a jurisdictional fact. The jurisdictional fact is appreciated and 
decided on all the circumstances which bring into existence HWP, 
whether as a Department of Atomic Energy or a separate corporate 
entity. The employees do not state that HWP is a separate public 
sector undertaking/government company with a certificate issued by 
the Registrar of Companies. HWP, as per the inception document, 
was constituted by the Office Memorandum dated 01.05.1969. 
The sequence is a Board of Management known as the Heavy 
Water Projects Board, created for managing the projects of DAE 
for the production of heavy water. HWP is a project of the DAE. To 
sieve out HWP from its constituent department is illegal and may 
go contrary to the AE Act. In response to the argument about the 
functional freedom granted to HWP, it is argued that this freedom is 
granted to accelerate the objectives sought through HWP projects. 
The appointment orders were issued in accordance with the CCS 
Rules. The department’s service rules cannot be treated as indicia 
for deciding the jurisdictional fact. The appointment orders speak 
in unison that CCS Rules govern the employees, and the resultant 

606
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
effect is that gratuity is payable under the CCS (Pension) Rules, 
1972. The circumstances leading to the establishment of HWPs 
render the establishment subject to exclusion under Section 2(e) of 
the PG Act. The need for an exemption notification under Section 
5 and the need to reply to overriding effect under Section 14 of the 
PG Act depend on the Act’s applicability to the relationship between 
an employer and an employee. The impugned judgment, in his 
argument, has briefly summarised the position in fact and law, and 
no ground exists warranting interference in the impugned judgment. 
It is lastly argued that, considering the importance of the entities, 
the hierarchy of establishment, command and control is decided by 
the Central Government. The employees cannot claim to have the 
benefit of CCS Rules, status of a Central Government employee, 
while for gratuity, the benefits under the PG Act. 
10.	 The applicability or inapplicability of the PG Act, to begin with, depends 
on whether the employee comes within the inclusive definition or the 
exclusive definition. The same is dependent on jurisdictional facts. In 
Arun Kumar v. Union of India,2 it has been held that a jurisdictional 
fact is a fact which must exist before a court, tribunal, or authority 
assumes jurisdiction over a particular matter. A jurisdictional fact is one 
on the existence or non-existence of which depends the jurisdiction 
of a court, a tribunal or an authority. It is the fact upon which an 
administrative agency’s power to act depends. If the jurisdictional fact 
does not exist, the court, authority or officer cannot act. If a court or 
authority wrongly assumes the existence of such a fact, the order 
can be questioned by a writ of certiorari. The underlying principle is 
that by erroneously assuming the existence of such a jurisdictional 
fact, no authority can confer upon itself jurisdiction which it otherwise 
does not possess.
11.	 It is axiomatic that a decision is an authority for what it decides 
and not what can be logically deduced therefrom. In our view, the 
decision in MCD (supra) cannot be an authority for deciding the 
applicability of the PG Act to the employees of HWP. We cannot 
logically also deduce the similarity of circumstances in the corporate 
entity of Municipal Corporation of Delhi and an annexe of the DAE. 
Therefore, the applicability is determined by the facts of the case 
considered by the tribunal/court. 
2	
 (2007) 1 SCC 732.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
607
N. Manoharan, Etc. v. The Administrative Officer and Another
12.	 It is relevant to notice that the amended definition deals with the first 
limb of Section 2(e),3 and the second exclusionary limb is the same 
in the pre- and post-amendment provisions. Construing Section 2(e), 
the second limb begins with the words “but does not include” any 
such person (i) who holds a post under the Central Government, 
(ii) a State Government, (iii) is governed by any other Act or (iv) by 
any Rules providing payment of gratuity. The exclusionary clause, 
if read by applying the golden rule without a further test, excludes 
employees of the Central and State Governments from the meaning 
of “employee” under the PG Act. Secondly, it also excludes a person 
who is governed by any other act. Thirdly, even if it is used as “or” 
but not as “and”, it excludes any such person who is governed by 
any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity. The 
provision contains the words both “means” and “does not include”. 
Under interpretation of statutes, this Court has repeatedly held that 
coupling the word “means” with “includes” denotes an exhaustive 
definition.4 Conversely, the word “means” and “does not include” 
should be read as exclusionary language that strictly excludes 
the scope of the provision from certain classes. Consequently, a 
person who is governed by any other Act, or governed by any Rules 
providing for payment of gratuity, does not come within the ambit of 
the definition of “employee” under the PG Act. 
12.1	 The construction of Section 2(e), as above, leads us to the 
factual matrix of the case. The AE Act is not considered 
exhaustively for the present purpose. Still, it is sufficient to refer 
3	
Pre-Amendment
Post-Amendment
“employee” means any person (other than 
an apprentice) employed on wages, in any 
establishment, factory, mine, oilfield, plantation, 
port, railway company or shop to do any skilled, 
semi-skilled, or unskilled, manual, supervisory, 
technical or clerical work, whether the terms 
of such employment are express or implied, 
and whether or not such person is employed 
in a managerial or administrative capacity, but 
does· not include any such person who holds a 
post under the Central Government or a State 
Government and is governed by any other Act or 
by any rules providing for payment of gratuity.”
“employee” means any person (other than an 
apprentice) who is employed for wages, whether 
the term such employment are express or implied, 
in any; kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or 
in connection with the work of a factory, mine, 
oilfield, plantation port, railway company, shop 
or other establishment to which this Act applies, 
but does not include any such person who holds 
a post under the Central Government or a State 
Government and is governed by any other Act or 
by any rules providing for payment of gratuity.”
4	
Mahalakshmi Oil Mills v. State of A.P. (1989) 1 SCC 164; P. Kasilingam And Others v. P.S.G College Of 
Technology And Others (1995) Supp. SCC 2 348

608
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to Section 3 of the AE Act which inter-alia empowers the Central 
Government to produce, develop, use and dispose of Atomic 
Energy, either by itself or through any Authority or Corporation 
established by it or a Government Company, and carry out 
research into any matters connected therewith. Similarly, 
to manufacture or to produce any prescribed radioactive 
substance or the ancillary works connected therewith, the 
difference in language between Clauses (a) and (b) of Section 
3 clearly demonstrate that a few of the functions/activities, the 
Central Government is empowered to do by itself or through any 
other authority or corporation established by it or a Government 
Company, and has power to manufacture or otherwise produce 
any prescribed or radioactive substance as per Clause (b). 
The chart in the above paragraph demonstrates the choice 
vested in the Central Government to undertake a particular 
act either directly or by establishing a company/PSU.
13.	 Since its inception, a board has been constituted to manage the 
HWPs of the DAE. The retired employees admit that HWP is not 
incorporated under the Companies Act, is not recognised as a 
PSU, or functions as a Government Company. In other words, the 
other attributes of a separate legal entity, incorporated association, 
artificial person, limited liability, common seal, perpetual succession, 
and transferability of shares are not present. In substance, without 
any ambiguity, the HWP is created to manage the projects of the 
DAE for the production of heavy water. HWP at Tuticorin is a project 
under the management of the Heavy Water Projects Board of the 
DAE, and cannot, by sieving, separate itself from being an ancillary 
or adjunct of the DAE. For the limited purpose of gratuity, the larger 
and comprehensive establishment of atomic energy facilities by the 
Central Government is not replaced with a very narrow construction 
of the functional freedom given to the Heavy Water Projects Board or 
individual Heavy Water Plants. The jurisdictional fact, on appreciation, 
leads us to the conclusion that HWP is an adjunct or ancillary 
operating through the Heavy Water Projects Board of the DAE. On 
examination of constitution, establishment, and continuation, we notice 
the character of HWP as an adjunct of the Department of Atomic 
Energy, and by choice, we are not adverting to the appointment 
orders or any other circulars for deciding the jurisdictional fact of 
“employees”. Therefore, the employees fall within the exclusionary 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
609
N. Manoharan, Etc. v. The Administrative Officer and Another
clause of Section 2(e) of the PG Act. The result of such exclusion is 
that Sections 5 and 14 are not attracted in deciding on the applicability 
of the PG Act to the employees of HWP. 
14.	 For the above reasons, we are in agreement with the order impugned, 
and the Civil Appeals fail and are dismissed. Pending applications, 
if any, stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Civil Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
