[2026] 4 S.C.R. 286 : 2026 INSC 305
Jai Prakash Saini  
v. 
Managing Director, U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 4130 of 2026)
01 April 2026
[Sanjay Karol and Manoj Misra,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
In the instant case, the department had not produced any witness 
in the enquiry even though the charges levelled upon the appellant 
were denied by him. Whether the enquiry stood vitiated.
Headnotes†
U.P. Cooperative Societies Act, 1965 – U.P. Cooperative 
Societies Employees Service Regulations, 1975 – regn. 85 – 
Employees Service Rules, 1980 of U.P. Cooperative Federation 
Limited – r.84 – Dismissal from service – Violation of principles 
of natural justice – Appellant was posted as the in-charge of 
the paddy procurement centre at U.P. Cooperative Federation 
Limited – He was served a charge-sheet alleging, inter alia, 
that as the in-charge of the centre he had purchased 1946.60 
quintals of paddy from farmers for delivery to M/s Pashupati 
Nath for de-husking, but delivery was short by 1093.60 
quintals – Departmental enquiry began – Vide supplementary 
charge sheet it is alleged that appellant embezzled Rs. 2,00,850 
by showing purchases of 5000 sacks of de-husked paddy for 
storage – Charges proved – Appellant was dismissed from 
service and a direction to recover the amount was issued – 
Writ petition filed before the High Court was dismissed – 
Appellant, inter alia, contends that not even a single witness 
was examined in support of the charges and no oral enquiry 
was held as required by the extant service rules – Correctness:
Held: It is settled that unless the charged employee accepts his 
guilt in clear terms, an enquiry on the charges drawn against him 
would have to be held – In the enquiry, the employer /department 
would have to take steps first to lead evidence against the 
workmen/delinquent charged and give an opportunity to him to 
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
287
Jai Prakash Saini v.  
Managing Director, U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. & Ors.
cross examine those witnesses – Only thereafter, the workmen / 
delinquent shall be asked whether he wants to lead any evidence 
and/ or submit an explanation about the evidence led against him – 
Even in a case based solely on documentary evidence, unless the 
relied upon documents are admitted by the charged employee, a 
witness would have to be examined to prove those documents 
and when so examined, the witness would have to be tendered 
for cross-examination – In the instant case, the department had 
not produced any witness in the enquiry even though the charges 
levelled upon the appellant were denied by him – Therefore, in 
view of this court, the enquiry stood vitiated – Once the enquiry 
stood vitiated, the consequential order of punishment/recovery 
cannot be sustained – Impugned judgment of the High Court is 
set aside – The order of dismissal and consequential recovery is 
also set aside – Liberty granted to the Federation to hold a de 
novo enquiry. [Paras 17, 18]
Case Law Cited
Chamoli District Co-operative Bank Limited & Another v. Raghunath 
Singh Rana & Others [2016] 7 SCR 86 : (2016) 12 SCC 204; Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works Ltd. v. Workmen, [1964] 3 SCR 
616 : AIR 1963 SC 1914 : 1963 SCC OnLine SC 97; State of 
Uttaranchal & Ors. v. Kharak Singh, [2008] 12 SCR 54 : (2008) 
8 SCC 236 – referred to.
List of Acts
U.P. Cooperative Societies Act, 1965; U.P. Cooperative Societies 
Employees Service Regulations, 1975; Employees Service Rules, 
1980 of U.P. Cooperative Federation Limited; Evidence Act, 1872.
List of Keywords
Violation of principles of natural justice; De-novo enquiry;  
No oral hearing; Witnesses not examined; Dismissal of employee; 
Opportunity to cross examine; Enquiry vitiated.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4130 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.04.2019 of the High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench in SB No. 12353 of 2016.

288
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Rajiv Srivastava, Ms. Garima Srivastava, Arpit Shukla, Ms. Gargi 
Srivastava.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Gaurav Dhingra, Sunny Choudhary, Mayur Chaturvedi, Ayush 
Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manoj Misra, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal impugns the judgment and order of the High Court1 dated 
12.04.2019 whereby the writ petition2 of the appellant impugning the 
order dated 30.11.2015 dismissing him from service and directing 
recovery of Rs.9,53,433 has been dismissed.
3.	
The appellant was employed in U.P. Cooperative Federation 
Limited3 and, at the relevant time, posted as the in-charge of paddy 
procurement centre. He was served a charge-sheet alleging, inter 
alia, that as the in-charge of the centre he had purchased 1946.60 
quintals of paddy from farmers for delivery to M/s Pashupati Nath 
Food Agro (for short, M/s Pashupati Nath) for de-husking, but delivery 
was short by 1093.60 quintals. During pendency of the enquiry on 
the said charge-sheet, a supplementary charge-sheet was served 
upon the appellant alleging that he had embezzled Rs. 2,00,850 by 
showing purchases of 5000 sacks of de-husked paddy for storage. 
The charges were found proved in the enquiry. As a result, the 
appellant was dismissed from service and a direction to recover the 
amount was issued.
4.	
The order of dismissal/ recovery was challenged before the High 
Court, inter alia, on the ground that the enquiry was de-hors the extant 
1	
The High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench 
2	
Service Bench No.12353 of 2016
3	
The Federation

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
289
Jai Prakash Saini v.  
Managing Director, U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. & Ors.
rules and violated the principles of natural justice. It was pleaded that 
no oral enquiry was held, no date, place and time of enquiry was 
fixed, and no witness was examined to prove the charges.
5.	
In the counter affidavit to the writ petition, the respondents accepted 
that the service conditions of the writ petitioner (i.e., the appellant 
herein) were governed by the provisions of U.P. Cooperative Societies 
Act, 19654 as well as U.P. Cooperative Societies Employees Service 
Regulations, 19755 and Employees Service Rules, 1980 of U.P. 
Cooperative Federation Limited6. It was highlighted that there existed 
material on record to indicate that the appellant had embezzled the 
amount sought to be recovered from him. Further, the appellant was 
provided ample opportunity of hearing in the enquiry. Therefore, there 
was no violation of the principles of natural justice.
6.	
By the impugned order, the High Court dismissed the writ petition 
of the appellant. Reasons for the dismissal of the writ petition are 
found in paragraphs 19 to 26 of the impugned judgment which are 
reproduced below:
“19. The petitioner was served with a charge-sheet as 
well as supplementary charge-sheet dated 26.10.2013 
and 21.12.2013, respectively. In the said charge-sheet as 
well as supplementary charge-sheet, it was specifically 
mentioned that in case petitioner wants to produce any 
defence witness and wants an opportunity of personal 
hearing; then, he shall specifically request for the same in 
his reply to the charge-sheet and supplementary charge-
sheet.
20. The petitioner had submitted his reply dated 11.11.2013 
to the charge-sheet and reply dated 03.01.2014 to the 
supplementary charge-sheet denying the charges made 
against him. The Enquiry Officer thereafter proceeded to 
hold the enquiry. The Enquiry Officer concluded the enquiry 
and submitted the enquiry report dated 23.01.2014. The 
perusal of enquiry report indicates that after submission 
of reply to the charge-sheet as well as supplementary 
4	
1965 Act
5	
1975 Regulations
6	
1980 Service Rules

290
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
charge-sheet the Enquiry Officer had fixed the date for 
holding oral enquiry and in this regard oral enquiry was 
held on 16.01.2014. The Enquiry Officer considering the 
charge-sheet, evidence relied in support of the charges, 
reply as well as evidence relied in defence and the relevant 
records and thereafter came to conclusion that the charges 
levelled against the petitioner have been found proved and 
he is guilty of the alleged misconduct.
21. It is to be noted that the petitioner did not make any 
request for producing any defence witness during enquiry 
nor any request to cross-examine any person whose letter 
or report was relied in support of the charges was made. 
Neither in the replies submitted to the charge-sheet as well 
as supplementary charge-sheet nor by any separate letter, 
the petitioner had made any request to the Enquiry Officer 
to produce any defence witness or to cross-examine any 
person in order to deny the alleged charges. The Enquiry 
Officer on the basis of evidence on record had come to the 
conclusion that the charges levelled against the petitioner 
are found proved. 
22. In the given facts and circumstances, it is very much 
clear that the Enquiry Officer had followed the procedure 
prescribed in conducting the enquiry and there was no 
violation of principles of natural justice.
23. So far as the contention that the petitioner was not 
given opportunity to submit his reply to the enquiry report 
is concerned, it is to be noted that the petitioner was issued 
show cause notice dated 24.04.2014 and along with the 
said show cause notice enquiry report dated 23.01.2014 
was annexed. The petitioner was called upon to submit his 
reply on the proposed punishment as mentioned in the said 
show cause notice. He was also informed that if he wants 
an opportunity of personal hearing and wants to produce 
any witness, etc. in his defence, he may inform and in this 
regard, may give the details of the names of witnesses and 
their addresses. It was clarified that at the time of hearing, 
he will have to produce his witnesses at his own expenses.
24. The petitioner submitted his reply dated 21.05.2014 to the 
said show cause notice. In this reply, it was submitted that 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
291
Jai Prakash Saini v.  
Managing Director, U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. & Ors.
he has to submit many documents and produce witnesses 
which is possible only in oral enquiry. In the oral enquiry, 
several persons were required to be cross-examined, 
however, they were not cross-examined. The opportunity 
of personal hearing cannot take the place of oral enquiry. 
He shall be given an opportunity of personal hearing only 
after holding oral enquiry. He shall not be burdened to bear 
the expenses of producing the defence witnesses.
25. The perusal of the impugned order clearly goes to 
indicate that the Disciplinary Authority before passing 
the impugned order had given opportunity of hearing to 
the petitioner and in this regard the petitioner was heard 
by the Disciplinary Authority, Managing Director, PCF 
on 12.06.2014. After considering the entire material on 
record and reply to the show cause notice, the Disciplinary 
Authority by a detailed order had come to the conclusion 
that the petitioner is guilty of the charges levelled against 
him and, as such, liable to be punished by awarding 
punishment of dismissal from service. The competent 
authority has passed a detailed and reasoned order to 
award the punishment to the petitioner.
26. Considering the entire aspect of the matter, we are 
of the considered view that the contention raised by the 
petitioner has no force and the order impugned awarding 
punishment of dismissal from service to the petitioner is 
in accordance with law.”
(Emphasis supplied)
7.	
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused 
the records. 
8.	
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that despite the fact 
that the charges levelled in the charge-sheet were denied by the 
appellant, not even a single witness was examined in support of the 
charges and no oral enquiry was held as is required by the extant 
service rules, therefore, the order of dismissal and consequential 
recovery is in teeth of the service rules and violates the principles 
of natural justice.
9.	
Per contra, on behalf of the respondent it was submitted that there 
was no specific denial of the charges therefore, examination of 

292
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
witnesses was not required. Moreover, the enquiry report is based 
on available materials and is well-reasoned, therefore, the High Court 
was justified in dismissing the writ petition.
10.	 We have accorded due consideration to the rival submissions and 
have perused the materials on record. Before we proceed to address 
the respective submissions, we may put on record that while closing 
the hearing of this matter, we had requested the learned counsel 
for the parties to submit their written submissions. Besides, we had 
requested the counsel representing the respondents to make a specific 
statement whether any witness was examined by the Federation in 
the course of disciplinary proceedings held against the appellant.
11.	 Pursuant thereto, written submissions have been filed.
12.	 In the written submissions filed on behalf of the appellant, it has been 
reiterated that no oral enquiry was held, no witness was examined in 
the disciplinary proceedings and the disciplinary proceedings are in 
complete violation of the extant rules as also the principles of natural 
justice. The appellant has also relied on a decision of this Court 
in Chamoli District Co-operative Bank Limited & Another vs. 
Raghunath Singh Rana & Others7 wherein on ground of there being 
no oral enquiry, the order of punishment was set aside with liberty to 
the respondent to hold a de novo enquiry in accordance with the rules.
13.	 In the written submission filed on behalf of the respondents, it is 
admitted that no witness was examined in the enquiry. However, it is 
contended that in response to the charge of not supplying 1093.66 
quintals of paddy to M/s. Pashupati Nath, the reply of the appellant 
was evasive and, therefore, it amounted to admitting the charge. 
Hence, it was not necessary to produce any witness to prove the 
charge as under Section 58 of the Evidence Act, 1872, facts admitted 
need not be proved. 
14.	 We do not find substance in the submissions made on behalf of 
the respondents because there is no categorical admission of the 
charge by the appellant. Further, a departmental charge-sheet is not 
a plaint that an evasive reply thereto may amount to an admission. 
In a departmental enquiry, unless the charge is admitted, the burden 
to prove the charge lies on the employer/ department. Here, there 
7	
(2016) 12 SCC 204

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
293
Jai Prakash Saini v.  
Managing Director, U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. & Ors.
was no admission of guilt qua the charge. Even the High Court, in 
paragraph 20 of its judgment, had indicated that the writ petitioner 
(i.e., the appellant herein) had denied the charges made against him. 
In our view, therefore, the contention on behalf of the respondents 
that the appellant had admitted the charges is incorrect.
15.	 Rule 84 of the Service Rules, 1980, which governs the disciplinary 
proceedings against an employee of the Federation, is in pari 
materia with Regulation 85 of 1975 Regulations, which is extracted 
below:
“85.  Disciplinary Proceedings.—(i) The disciplinary 
proceedings against an employee shall be conducted by 
the inquiring officer [referred to in clause (iv) below] with 
due observance of the principles of natural justice for 
which it shall be necessary—
(a) The employee shall be served with a charge-sheet 
containing specific charges and mention of evidence in 
support of each charge and he shall be required to submit 
explanation in respect of the charges within reasonable 
time which shall not be less than fifteen days;
(b) Such an employee shall also be given an opportunity 
to produce at his own cost or to cross-examine witnesses 
in his defence and shall also be given an opportunity of 
being heard in person, if he so desires;
(c) If no explanation in respect of charge-sheet is 
received or the explanation submitted is unsatisfactory, 
the competent authority may award him appropriate 
punishment considered necessary.
(ii) (a) Where an employee is dismissed or removed from 
service on the ground of conduct which has led to his 
conviction on a criminal charge; or
(b) Where the employee has absconded and his 
whereabouts are not known to the society for more than 
three months; or
(c) Where the employee refuses or fails without sufficient 
cause to appear before the inquiring officer when 
specifically called upon in writing to appear; or

294
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(d) Where it is otherwise (for reasons to be recorded) not 
possible to communicate with him, the competent authority 
may award appropriate punishment without taking, or 
continuing, disciplinary proceedings.
(iii) Disciplinary proceedings shall be taken by the society 
against the employee on a report made to this effect by 
the inspecting authority or an officer of the society under 
whose control the employee is working.
(iv) The inquiring officer shall be appointed by the appointing 
authority or by an officer of the society authorised for the 
purpose by the appointing authority:
Provided that the officer at whose instance disciplinary 
action was started shall not be appointed as an inquiring 
officer nor shall the inquiring officer be the appellate 
authority:”
16.	 In Chamoli District Co-operative (supra), Regulation 85 of 
1975 Regulations was applicable, yet no oral enquiry was 
held. The order of major punishment was challenged by the 
employee concerned on the ground that no oral enquiry was 
held. That is, neither any witness was examined to prove the 
charge nor any witness was offered for cross-examination. This 
Court after considering a series of its earlier decisions including 
Sur Enamel and Stamping Works Ltd. v. Workmen8 and 
8	
See: AIR 1963 SC 1914: (1964) 3 SCR 616: 1963 SCC OnLine SC 97
“4. … An enquiry cannot be said to have been properly held unless, (i) the employee proceeded 
against has been informed clearly of the charges levelled against him, (ii) the witnesses are 
examined -- ordinarily in the presence of the employee -- in respect of the charges, (iii) the 
employee is given a fair opportunity to cross examine witnesses, (iv) he is given a fair opportunity 
to examine witnesses including himself in his defence if he so wishes on any relevant matter, and 
(v) the inquiry officer records his findings with reasons for the same in his report. In the present 
case the persons whose statements made behind the backs of the employees were used by 
the inquiring authority were not made available for cross examination but it would appear that 
they were not even present at the inquiry. It does not even appear that these reports were made 
available to the employee at any time before the inquiry was held. Even if the persons who 
made the reports had been present and the employee given an opportunity to cross examine 
them, it would have been difficult to say in these circumstances that that was a fair and sufficient 
opportunity. But in this case, it appears that the persons who made the reports did not attend the 
inquiry at all. From whatever aspect the matter is examined it is clear that there was no inquiry 
worth the name and the tribunal was justified in entirely ignoring the conclusion reached by the 
Domestic Tribunal.”

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
295
Jai Prakash Saini v.  
Managing Director, U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. & Ors.
State of Uttaranchal & Ors. v. Kharak Singh9, concluded 
thus: 
“22. From the propositions of law, as enunciated by the 
Apex Court as noted above, and the facts of the present 
case, we arrive at the following conclusions:
22.1. After service of charge sheet dated 16.01.1993 
although the petitioners submitted his reply on 04.02.1993 
but neither Inquiry Officer fixed any date of oral inquiry nor 
any inquiry was held by the inquiry Officer.
22.2. Mandatory requirement of a disciplinary inquiry i.e. 
holding of an inquiry when the charges are refuted and 
serving the inquiry report to the delinquent has been 
breached in the present case.
22.3. Respondent 1 employee having not been given 
opportunity to produce his witnesses in his defence and 
having not been given an opportunity of being heard in 
person, the statutory provisions as enshrined in Regulation 
85(i)(b), have been violated.
22.4. The disciplinary authority issued show case notice 
dated 04.05.1993 to respondent 1 employee without 
holding of an inquiry and subsequent resolution by 
disciplinary authority taken in the year 2000 without their 
being any further steps is clearly unsustainable. The High 
9	
See: (2008) 8 SCC 236
“15. From the above decisions, the following principles would emerge:
1.	
The inquiries must be conducted bona fide and care must be taken to see that the 
inquiries do not become empty formalities.
2.	
If an officer is a witness to any of the incidents which is the subject matter of the inquiry 
or if the inquiry was initiated on a report of an officer, then in all fairness he should not 
be the inquiry officer. If the said position becomes known after the appointment of the 
inquiry officer, during the inquiry, steps should be taken to see that the task of holding 
an inquiry is assigned to some other officer.
3.	
In an inquiry, the employer /department should take steps first to lead evidence against 
the workmen / delinquent charged and give an opportunity to him to cross examine the 
witnesses of the employer. Only thereafter, the workmen / delinquent be asked whether 
he wants to lead any evidence and asked to give any explanation about the evidence 
led against him.
4.	
On receipt of the inquiry report, before proceeding further, it is incumbent on the part 
of the disciplinary / punishing authority to supply a copy of the inquiry report and all 
connected materials relied on by the inquiry officer to enable him to offer his views, if 
any.”

296
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Court has rightly quashed the dismissal order by giving 
liberty to the Bank to hold de novo inquiry within a period 
of six months, if it so desires.
22.5. The bank shall be at liberty to proceed with the 
disciplinary inquiry as per directions of the High Court in 
para 1 of the judgment. The High Court has already held 
that petitioner shall be deemed to be under suspension 
and shall be paid suspension allowance in accordance 
with the rules.”
17.	 From the decisions of this Court in Sur Enamel (supra) and Kharak 
Singh (supra), followed in Chamoli District Cooperative (supra), 
which deals with similar service rules as are applicable here, it is 
now settled that unless the charged employee accepts his guilt in 
clear terms, an enquiry on the charges drawn against him would have 
to be held. In the enquiry, the employer /department would have to 
take steps first to lead evidence against the workmen / delinquent 
charged and give an opportunity to him to cross examine those 
witnesses. Only thereafter, the workmen / delinquent shall be asked 
whether he wants to lead any evidence and/ or submit an explanation 
about the evidence led against him. Even in a case based solely 
on documentary evidence, unless the relied upon documents are 
admitted by the charged employee, a witness would have to be 
examined to prove those documents and when so examined, the 
witness would have to be tendered for cross-examination. 
18.	 In the instant case, we find that the department had not produced 
any witness in the enquiry even though the charges levelled upon 
the appellant were denied by him. Therefore, in our view, the enquiry 
stood vitiated. Once the enquiry stood vitiated, the consequential 
order of punishment/ recovery cannot be sustained. We therefore 
allow this appeal. The impugned judgment and order of the High 
Court is set aside. The writ petition of the appellant stands allowed to 
the extent indicated below. The order of dismissal and consequential 
recovery is set aside. The Federation is, however, at liberty to hold a 
de novo enquiry, if it so desires, within a period of six months from 
the date of this order. If the Federation does not hold de novo enquiry 
as permitted above, the appellant shall be entitled to reinstatement 
with benefit of continuity in service including arrears of salary after 
adjusting suspension allowance, if any, paid already. In case the 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
297
Jai Prakash Saini v.  
Managing Director, U.P. Cooperative Federation Ltd. & Ors.
Federation chooses to hold an enquiry, it shall reinstate the appellant 
and place him under suspension till completion of the enquiry and 
during this period pay suspension allowance as may be payable in 
accordance with law. In case de novo enquiry is held, other service 
benefits including arrears of salary as well as benefits of continuity 
in service shall depend on the outcome of the enquiry. 
19.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
20.	 There is no order as to costs.	
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
