[2026] 4 S.C.R. 112 : 2026 INSC 233
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. 
v. 
Union of India & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 3351 of 2026)
12 March 2026
[Sanjay Karol* and Vipul M. Pancholi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Air Force Group Insurance Society (AFGIS) could be 
treated as “State” or “other authority” within the meaning of Art.12 
of the Constitution of India.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Art.12 – The appellants are employees 
of the Air Force Group Insurance Society – The pay scales 
of the workers were sought to be revised in accordance with 
the Sixth Pay Commission of the Government of India – Writ 
petitions – High Court held that that the Air Force Group 
Insurance Society could not be treated as “State” or “other 
authority” within the meaning of Art.12 of the Constitution of 
India, therefore the writ petitions filed were not maintainable – 
Correctness:
Held: In view of this Court, a perusal of the documents make out 
a case for AFGIS to be considered ‘State’ within the meaning of 
Art.12 – The Hon’ble President of India granted sanction for AFGIS 
to be established and also specifically approved the deputation 
Rules – When the aspect of administrative control is examined, 
it is seen that all the members of the Board of Trustees, so also 
the Managing Committee are serving members of the IAF and are 
deputed to AFGIS for a fixed period – In essence, therefore, the 
administration of the Body is entirely in the hands of Government 
servants even though the body itself is a purportedly private, a 
self-contained society – This Court is of the considered view that 
AFGIS does indeed perform a public duty – The protection and 
welfare of armed forces personnel is a core government function – 
Providing insurance coverage is a public function as it addresses 
a collective obligation the State has towards a defined public class 
whose service is indispensable – Insurance to service members 
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
113
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
is a critical instrument for safeguarding their physical, mental 
well-being, dignity and economic security – It is also seen that at 
one-point AFGIS itself claimed to be Government while claiming an 
exemption from service taxes, since it is under the control of Ministry 
of Defence – Thus, AFGIS would be ‘State’ under Art.12 – The 
writ petition before the High Court accordingly, maintainable – The 
said writ petition on the grievance of the appellants is restored. 
[Paras 15, 17-19]
Case Law Cited
Ajay Hasia and Others v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi and Others 
[1981] 2 SCR 79 : (1981) 1 SCC 722; Pradeep Kumar Biswas and 
Others v. Indian Institute of Chemical Biology and Others [2002] 
3 SCR 100 : (2002) 5 SCC 111 – followed.
Zee Telefilms Ltd. v. Union of India [2005] 1 SCR 913 : (2005) 4 
SCC 649; Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority 
of India [1979] 3 SCR 1014 : (1979) 3 SCC 489 – relied on.
Chander Mohan Khanna v. National Council of Educational 
Research and Training [1991] Supp. 1 SCR 165 : (1991) 4 SCC 
578; Rajkaran Singh v. Union of India [2024] 8 SCR 516 : 2024 
SCC OnLine SC 2138 – referred to.
Sagarika Singh v. Union of India and Other, 2011 SCC OnLine 
Del 3612; Ex. Sub. Rajender Singh v. Union of India and Others, 
2013 SCC OnLine Del 1598 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Societies Registration Act, 1860.
List of Keywords
Article 12 of Constitution; Instrumentality of State; Writ Maintainability; 
Deep and Pervasive Control; Air Force Group Insurance Society 
(AFGIS); Consolidated Fund of India; State; Practical governance; 
Financial control.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3351 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.02.2023 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in WP (C) No. 5024 of 2017

114
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Shoeb Alam, Sr. Adv., Sourav Roy, Udai Khanna, Anshu Deshpande, 
Pranav Bafna, Hemant Gupta.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Vikramjeet Banerjee, A.S.G., Mukesh Kumar Maroria, B Sunita Rao, 
P V Yogeswaran, Ms. Sakshi Kakkar, Praneet Pranav, Navanjay 
Mahapatra, Abhishek Khanna, Ankur Chibber, Anshuman Mehrotra, 
Nikunj Arora, Prahil Sharma, Vardhman Kaushik.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
Leave Granted.
THE CONTROVERSY IN A NUTSHELL
2.	
The Appellants are employees of the Air Force Group Insurance 
Society1 established under the Societies Registration Act, 18602 
in the year 1976, with sanction of the Hon’ble President of India, 
having been received in the same year on 6th October. The dispute 
germane to this lis is that while the Board of Trustees, had, vide 
special meeting dated 27th December 2016 decided that the pay 
scales of the workers would be revised in accordance with the Sixth 
Pay Commission of the Government of India, subsequently, by way 
of meeting dated 13th February 2017 resolved that pay structures 
would be revised in a way that any linkage/connection to and pay 
parity with the Central Government, by virtue of the Pay Commissions 
be done away with, and according thereto, asked all employees by 
way of notice dated 22nd May 2017 to sign their acceptance to the 
revised terms. 
1	
AFGIS 
2	
SRA

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
115
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT
3.	
The appellants, aggrieved thereby, filed Writ Petitions before the 
High Court of Delhi3 which were dismissed by a common judgment 
dated 1st February 2023. The findings of the Learned Division Bench 
can be summarised as follows:
3.1	 The Court’s central finding was that none of the respondent 
organisations, namely the Air Force Group Insurance Society, the 
Air HQs Non-Public Fund Organisation, or the CRPF Employees’ 
Educational Society, could be treated as “State” or “other 
authority” within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of 
India. This determination was foundational, because the Court 
held that unless the respondents satisfied the requirements 
of Article 12, the writ petitions under Article 226 were not 
maintainable and the Court cannot not adjudicate on claims 
relating to pay parity, service conditions, promotions, retirement 
age, or implementation of Pay Commission recommendations.
In examining the status of the Air Force Group Insurance 
Society, the Court found that it is a Society registered under 
the Societies Registration Act, 1860, established in 1976 as 
a self-contained and self-run welfare and insurance scheme 
meant exclusively for Air Force personnel and their families. 
While senior Air Force officers form part of the Board of 
Trustees and certain officers are posted with the Society 
on deputation, the Court held that this association does not 
translate into deep or pervasive governmental control. The 
day-to-day administration of the Society is carried out under 
its own internal governance framework, and its finances are 
sourced entirely from member contributions and the insurance 
fund rather than from any budgetary allocation or grant from the 
Central Government. The Court placed particular reliance on 
the appointment letters of AFGIS employees, which expressly 
state that their service conditions are governed by the Rules 
of the Society as amended from time to time. The Court noted 
that there is no statutory or contractual guarantee of parity with 
Central Government employees and that allowances and pay 
structures are subject to approval by the Board of Trustees. 
3	
WP(C) No. 5024 of 2017; WP(C) No. 16428 of 2022, CM APPL 51620 of 2022; WP(C) No. 6759 of 2022; 
WP(C) No. 13858 of 2018; WP(C) No. 863 of 2019; WP(C) No. 15835 of 2022 & CM APPL. 49280 of 2022. 

116
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
The Court, therefore, concluded that even if historical parity 
with Central Government pay scales had existed in practice, 
it did not create any enforceable legal right nor did it convert 
AFGIS into an instrumentality of the State.
3.2	 While addressing the legal tests applicable to Article 12, the 
Court reaffirmed the principles laid down by the Constitution 
Bench of the Court in Ajay Hasia and Others v. Khalid Mujib 
Sehravardi and Others4, which emphasised that the decisive 
question is not how an entity is created but whether it functions 
as an instrumentality or agency of the Government. The Court 
further relied on Pradeep Kumar Biswas and Others v. 
Indian Institute of Chemical Biology and Others,5, where 
the Supreme Court clarified that the tests laid down in Ajay 
Hasia (supra) are not rigid and that the cumulative facts must 
demonstrate financial, functional, and administrative domination 
by the Government, with control that is deep and pervasive. 
The Court also drew support from Chander Mohan Khanna v. 
National Council of Educational Research and Training6, 
which cautioned against an over-expansive interpretation of 
Article 12 merely on the basis of governmental association or 
assistance.
The Court specifically rejected the petitioners’ reliance on 
Sagarika Singh v. Union of India and Others7, noting that the 
reasoning in that decision had subsequently been disapproved 
by a larger Bench of the Delhi High Court in Ex. Sub. Rajender 
Singh v. Union of India and Others8,. The Court observed that 
the larger Bench had clarified that welfare or insurance schemes 
connected with the armed forces cannot automatically be treated 
as “State” in the absence of pervasive governmental control, 
and that the earlier view taken in Sagarika Singh (supra) no 
longer represents good law.
3.3	 Applying these settled principles to the facts of the present cases, 
the Court concluded that all the respondent organisations are 
4	
(1981) 1 SCC 722
5	
(2002) 5 SCC 111
6	
(1991) 4 SCC 578
7	
2011 SCC OnLine Del 3612
8	
2013 SCC OnLine Del 1598

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
117
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
autonomous, self-funded societies established for the limited 
benefit of their members and not for the public at large. The 
Court found no evidence of financial dependence on the Central 
Government, nor any administrative or functional domination 
of the kind required to attract Article 12. Consequently, the 
writ petitions were held to be not maintainable. The interim 
protection granted in one of the petitions was vacated, and all 
petitions were dismissed with liberty granted to the petitioners 
to pursue their remedies before appropriate alternative forums 
such as civil courts or labour adjudicatory bodies.
3.4	 It has to be noted that the status of certain other bodies as 
“State” within the meaning of Article 12 was also a question 
before the High Court, namely Air HQs Non-Public Fund 
Organisation and CRPF Employees’ Educational Society, but 
since the determination in respect thereof is not under challenge 
before us, we need not enter into the particulars thereof. 
THE CASE OF THE PARTIES 
A.	
The Appellants 
4.	
We have heard Mr. Shoeb Alam, learned senior counsel for the 
appellants. It is submitted that AFGIS has represented itself to be 
‘Government’ in official correspondence. As an example, a letter dated 
15th March 2016 was shown. The cumulative test is financial functional 
and administrative dominance of the Government and accordingly it is 
submitted that the day-to-day affairs are managed by serving senior 
officers of the Indian Air Force9. The very establishment was with the 
sanction of the Hon’ble President of India, and membership of this 
Organisation is compulsory for all Officers and Airmen. Further, the 
land on which the office is situate has been granted by the Ministry 
of Defence, Government of India, and it also enjoys exemptions 
from various taxes levied. Still further, it is also highlighted that the 
functions performed by AFGIS are of public importance and welfare 
oriented. Heavy reliance is placed on a recent judgment of this 
Court in Rajkaran Singh v. Union of India10, wherein this Court 
9	
‘IAF’
10	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 2138

118
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
examined the issue concerning employees of a compulsory savings 
fund being entitled to benefits of the Central Pay Commission, 
which was answered in the affirmative given alignment of service 
conditions, pervasive government control and public function. As 
such, the appellants, being similarly placed would also be entitled to 
the benefits of the 7th Pay Commission in line with the past position 
where they have been granted the said benefits.
B.	
Respondent-AFGIS
5.	
Mr. Ankur Chibber, learned Counsel appeared for AFGIS and 
submitted that the body is not ‘State’ within the meaning of Article 
12 for it is a self-financed, non-public fund society. The premiums 
paid by the members are deducted centrally by the Air Force Central 
Accounts Office and then remitted to the Organisation. This is the only 
source of funds, and it has no inflow or outflow from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. During the time when the officers of IAF come to the 
Organisation on deputation their salary and allowances are borne by 
the AFGIS itself. It also employees 47 civilian staff members who are 
not government servant. The members of the Board of trustees are 
ex-officio and do not receive any remuneration in respect of these 
duties. The accounts are maintained by a privately hired Chartered 
Accountant and AFGIS does not submit any report to the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India. It is as such submitted that the High 
Court’s holding in the impugned judgment that a petition under Article 
226 will not be maintainable, is the correct position in law. 
C.	
Respondent-UNION OF INDIA
6.	
Mr. Vikramjeet Banerjee, learned ASG appeared for the Union of 
India and supported the stand of AFGIS.
CONSIDERATION ON MERITS
7.	
Since the advent of the Constitution, the question of whether a 
particular body can or cannot be recognised as ‘State’ within the 
meaning of Article 1211 has arisen time and again. Initially, this Court 
11	
Article 12 of the Constitution of India reads thus:
“12. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “the State’’ includes the Government and 
Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other 
authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.”

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
119
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
adopted a narrow and formalistic approach focusing on whether 
the body concerned which was created under a statute was part 
of the traditional Government structure. Over the time however, 
as functions of the Government expanded multi-fold there was 
a shift in this approach. State instrumentalities, corporations and 
autonomous bodies were recognised as covered under this Article, 
with the shift to a functional and purposive analysis. The test to be 
satisfied pertained to the nature of functions, character of activity, 
degree of governmental control. This ensured that the breadth or 
scope of examination when this question arises is not limited to 
ownership/origin but is instead informed by accountability, the rule 
of law in furtherance of practical governance. It shall be useful to 
refer to certain cases to exemplify the requirements that need to be 
established for an organization be held to be “State”.
7.1	 P.N Bhagwati J. (as His Lordship then was) writing for the Court 
in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority 
of India12, observed:
“14. A corporation may be created in one of two 
ways. It may be either established by statute or 
incorporated under a law such as the Companies Act, 
1956 or the Societies Registration Act, 1860. Where 
a corporation is wholly controlled by Government not 
only in its policy-making but also in carrying out the 
functions entrusted to it by the law establishing it or 
by the charter of its incorporation, there can be no 
doubt that it would be an instrumentality or agency 
of Government. But ordinarily where a corporation is 
established by statute, it is autonomous in its working, 
subject only to a provision, oftentimes made, that it 
shall be bound by any directions that may be issued 
from time to time by Government in respect of policy 
matters. So also a corporation incorporated under law 
is managed by a board of directors or committees 
of management in accordance with the provisions 
of the statute under which it is incorporated. When 
does such a corporation become an instrumentality 
12	
(1979) 3 SCC 489, ‘R.D Shetty’

120
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
or agency of Government? Is the holding of the 
entire share capital of the corporation by Government 
enough or is it necessary that in addition, there should 
be a certain amount of direct control exercised by 
Government and, if so, what should be the nature 
of such control? Should the functions which the 
corporation is charged to carry out possess any 
particular characteristic or feature, or is the nature 
of the functions immaterial? Now, one thing is clear 
that if the entire share capital of the corporation is 
held by Government, it would go a long way towards 
indicating that the corporation is an instrumentality 
or agency of Government. But, as is quite often 
the case, a corporation established by statute may 
have no shares or shareholders, in which case it 
would be a relevant factor to consider whether the 
administration is in the hands of a board of directors 
appointed by Government, though this consideration 
also may not be determinative, because even where 
the directors are appointed by Government, they may 
be completely free from governmental control in the 
discharge of their functions. What then are the tests 
to determine whether a corporation established by 
statute or incorporated under law is an instrumentality 
or agency of Government? It is not possible to 
formulate an all-inclusive or exhaustive test which 
would adequately answer this question. There is 
no cut and dried formula which would provide the 
correct division of corporations into those which are 
instrumentalities or agencies of Government and 
those which are not.”
7.2	 A Constitution Bench in Ajay Hasia (supra) following the tests 
laid down in R.D Shetty (supra)held as under:
“9. The tests for determining as to when a corporation 
can be said to be an instrumentality or agency of 
Government may now be culled out from the judgment 
in the International Airport Authority case [(1979) 3 
SCC 489] . These tests are not conclusive or clinching, 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
121
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
but they are merely indicative indicia which have to be 
used with care and caution, because while stressing 
the necessity of a wide meaning to be placed on the 
expression “other authorities”, it must be realised that 
it should not be stretched so far as to bring in every 
autonomous body which has some nexus with the 
Government within the sweep of the expression. A 
wide enlargement of the meaning must be tempered 
by a wise limitation. We may summarise the relevant 
tests gathered from the decision in the International 
Airport Authority case [(1979) 3 SCC 489] as follows:
“(1) One thing is clear that if the entire share capital 
of the corporation is held by Government, it would go 
a long way towards indicating that the corporation is 
an instrumentality or agency of Government. (SCC 
p. 507, para 14)
(2) Where the financial assistance of the State is so 
much as to meet almost entire expenditure of the 
corporation, it would afford some indication of the 
corporation being impregnated with Governmental 
character. (SCC p. 508, para 15)
(3) It may also be a relevant factor ... whether the 
corporation enjoys monopoly status which is State 
conferred or State protected. (SCC p. 508, para 15)
(4) Existence of deep and pervasive State control 
may afford an indication that the corporation is a 
State agency or instrumentality. (SCC p. 508, para 15)
(5) If the functions of the corporation are of public 
importance and closely related to Governmental 
functions, it would be a relevant factor in classifying 
the corporation as an instrumentality or agency of 
Government. (SCC p. 509, para 16)
(6) ‘Specifically, if a department of Government is 
transferred to a corporation, it would be a strong 
factor supportive of this inference’ of the corporation 
being an instrumentality or agency of Government.” 
(SCC p. 510, para 18)

122
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
If on a consideration of these relevant factors it is 
found that the corporation is an instrumentality or 
agency of Government, it would, as pointed out in 
the International Airport Authority case [(1979) 3 SCC 
489] , be an “authority” and, therefore, ‘State’ within 
the meaning of the expression in Article 12.”
7.3	 A bench of seven Judges in Pradeep Kumar Biswas v. Indian 
Institute of Chemical Biology13 speaking through Ruma Pal J., 
referred to the previous decisions of the Court and held as under:
“38. … “these are merely indicative indicia and are 
by no means conclusive or clinching in any case”. In 
that case, the question arose whether the National 
Council of Educational Research (NCERT) was a 
“State” as defined under Article 12 of the Constitution. 
NCERT is a society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act. After considering the provisions of 
its memorandum of association as well as the rules 
of NCERT, this Court came to the conclusion that 
since NCERT was largely an autonomous body and 
the activities of NCERT were not wholly related to 
governmental functions and that the government 
control was confined only to the proper utilisation 
of the grant and since its funding was not entirely 
from government resources, the case did not satisfy 
the requirements of the State under Article 12 of the 
Constitution. …
39. Fresh off the judicial anvil is the decision in Mysore 
Paper Mills Ltd. v. Mysore Paper Mills Officers’ Assn. 
[(2002) 2 SCC 167 : 2002 SCC (L&S) 223 : JT (2002) 
1 SC 61] which fairly represents what we have seen as 
a continuity of thought commencing from the decision 
in Rajasthan Electricity Board [AIR 1967 SC 1857 : 
(1967) 3 SCR 377] in 1967 up to the present time. 
It held that a company substantially financed and 
financially controlled by the Government, managed 
by a Board of Directors nominated and removable 
13	
(2002) 5 SCC 111

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
123
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
at the instance of the Government and carrying 
on important functions of public interest under the 
control of the Government is “an authority” within 
the meaning of Article 12.
40. The picture that ultimately emerges is that the 
tests formulated in Ajay Hasia [Ajay Hasia v. Khalid 
Mujib Sehravardi, (1981) 1 SCC 722 : 1981 SCC 
(L&S) 258] are not a rigid set of principles so that 
if a body falls within any one of them it must, ex 
hypothesi, be considered to be a State within the 
meaning of Article 12. The question in each case 
would be — whether in the light of the cumulative facts 
as established, the body is financially, functionally and 
administratively dominated by or under the control of 
the Government. Such control must be particular to 
the body in question and must be pervasive. If this is 
found then the body is a State within Article 12. On 
the other hand, when the control is merely regulatory 
whether under statute or otherwise, it would not serve 
to make the body a State.
(emphasis supplied)
Recently in Rajkaran Singh (supra), on which 
great reliance has been placed by the appellant, 
this Court while dealing with the question whether 
the compulsory savings deposit fund of the Special 
Frontier Force, was ‘State’ or not whether the 
benefit of the 6th Central Pay Commission would be 
extended to the employees thereof or not. In para 
26 of the abovesaid judgment the concluding paras 
of Pradeep Kumar Biswas (supra) were reproduced 
and thereafter applied to the instant facts. The 
concluding paras of the latter judgment indicate the 
following – to be an authority within the meaning 
of Article 12 the entity should either be a creation 
of statute or be created under a statute functioning 
with liabilities and obligations to the public; Tests 1, 
2 and 4 in Ajay Hasia (supra) are determinative of 
ownership and tests 3, 5 and 6 are functional test. 

124
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
It is thereafter observed that “Neither all the tests 
are required to be answered in the positive nor a 
positive answer to one or two tests would suffice. It 
will depend on a combination of one or more of the 
relevant factors depending on the essentiality and 
overwhelming nature of such factors in identifying 
the real source of governing power…”
7.4	 The discussion made by N. Santosh Hegde J, writing for the 
majority in Zee Telefilms Ltd. v. Union of India14, is important 
for the present purposes. It was held:
“31. Be that as it may, it cannot be denied that the 
Board does discharge some duties like the selection 
of an Indian cricket team, controlling the activities 
of the players and others involved in the game of 
cricket. These activities can be said to be akin to 
public duties or State functions and if there is any 
violation of any constitutional or statutory obligation 
or rights of other citizens, the aggrieved party may 
not have a relief by way of a petition under Article 
32. But that does not mean that the violator of such 
right would go scot-free merely because it or he is 
not a State. Under the Indian jurisprudence there 
is always a just remedy for the violation of a right 
of a citizen. Though the remedy under Article 32 is 
not available, an aggrieved party can always seek a 
remedy under the ordinary course of law or by way 
of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, 
which is much wider than Article 32.
…
33. Thus, it is clear that when a private body exercises 
its public functions even if it is not a State, the 
aggrieved person has a remedy not only under the 
ordinary law but also under the Constitution, by way 
of a writ petition under Article 226. Therefore, merely 
because a non-governmental body exercises some 
14	
(2005) 4 SCC 649

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
125
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
public duty, that by itself would not suffice to make 
such body a State for the purpose of Article 12. In 
the instant case the activities of the Board do not 
come under the guidelines laid down by this Court 
in Pradeep Kumar Biswas case [(2002) 5 SCC 111 : 
2002 SCC (L&S) 633] hence there is force in the 
contention of Mr Venugopal that this petition under 
Article 32 of the Constitution is not maintainable.”
(emphasis supplied)
8.	
We now proceed to evaluate the rival contentions in the light of the 
judgments referred to supra. It is not in dispute that (a) membership 
of AFGIS is compulsory for all officers and Airmen; (b) the contribution 
of premiums are automatically deducted from the salaries; (c) the 
Board of Trustees comprises entirely of senior serving IAF officials; 
(d) service at AFGIS is considered to be proper deputation for officers 
and the sanction for this Body as also its deputation rules was granted 
by the Hon’ble President of India; (e) AFGIS periodically reports its 
financial transactions to a senior officer in the IAF; (f) in letter dated 
15th March 2016 AFGIS itself accepts its position as ‘Government’; 
(g) the President has accorded sanctions on separate occasions 
viz., introduction of substantive post in the Society, specific fixation 
of pay bands; and (h) the Society is exempt from various taxes 
given its compulsory nature as also automatic deduction from pay, 
AFGIS has a monopoly over insurance for IAF members. Let us 
unpack these points.
9.	
For points (a), (b), (f) and (g) the relevant portion of the letter dated 
15th March, 2016 referred to supra are reproduced below: 
“2.
xxx
xxx
xxx
(e) Para 5: As regards the issue of submission of ITR along 
with form 26 as for the period from 2010-11 to 2014-15, 
it is informed that this Society is established under the 
authority of Ministry of Defence, Govt of India to be run 
departmentally as a self-contained Society vide GOI, MoD 
letter No Air HQ/25657/17/D/Accts/1197 DOLA (Air-11)/76 
dated 06 Oct 1976 and that this Society is registered under 
the Society Registration Act (XXI of 1860) and also that 

126
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
this Society has been established by the Armed Forces of 
the Union of India (Air Force) for the welfare of the past 
and present members (air warrior / air veterans) and their 
dependents. The principal objective of the Society is to 
collect the mandatory and compulsory deduction from the 
air warriors so as to provide the financial relief in case of 
contingencies of death/disability of the air warrior occurring 
while in service/post retirement. Further, the Society also 
provides welfare services to air warriors / air veterans and 
their dependents by payment of survival (saving element of 
the mandatory and compulsory deduction) on retirement/
death. The income of the Society is exempted from Income 
Tax u/s 10(23)(C)(iv) of Income Tax Act 1961 as notified 
vide MoF letter No F.275/29/85-IT(B) dated 05 Jun 1985.
xxx
xxx
xxx
3. xxx
xxx
xxx
(c) Basis of the Working of the AFGIS: Consequent 
to the aforesaid sanction/approvals, the contributions 
by air warriors to AFGIS have been made mandatory 
and compulsory in terms of Air Force Instructions (AFI) 
16/87 issued by the Govt of India (Ministry of Defence). 
The monthly mandatory contributions are compulsorily 
deducted from the salary of all air warriors (officers, 
airmen and NCs(E)) from the day they join IAF. Hence, 
membership to the group insurance has become an integral 
part of the Service Conditions. It is pertinent to mention 
here that the AFGIS, like Army Group Insurance and Naval 
Group Insurance, caters only to ‘Men in Uniform’ and is 
not open to civilians or the general public. AFGIS does 
not issue any insurance policies to the air-warriors for its 
insurance schemes.
xxx
xxx
xxx
(g) Relationship between AFGIS and its Air Warrior 
Members.
One of the primary factors for deciding the applicability of 
Service Tax is the relationship between a service provider 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
127
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
and service receiver wherein there is a “flow of service”. 
AFGIS is a self-contained Society run departmentally under 
the authority of Govt of India (Ministry of Defence). The 
insurance schemes run by AFGIS are exclusively for the 
air warrior members hence the group is a “Closed Group”. 
Membership and contribution to the schemes is compulsory 
and mandatory. Following examples regarding decisions 
given by the Courts could further clarify this matter.
(i) In the case of Saturday Club Ltd v/s Assistant 
Commissioner, Service Tax, 2006 (3) STR 305; 
the Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta observed that, 
“Principally there should be an existence of two sides/
entities for having transaction as against consideration. 
In a members club there is no question of two sides. 
‘Members’ and ‘club’ both are same entity. One may 
be called as ‘Principal’ while the other may be called 
as ‘Agent’ and therefore, such transaction in between 
themselves cannot be recorded as income, sale or 
service as per applicability of the revenue tax of the 
country.”
(ii) In the matter of New Delhi CESTAT in the case 
of Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce & 
Industry (FICCI) v/s Commissioner of Service Tax, 
Delhi (2015) 38 S.T.R. 529 (New Delhi - CESTAT) 
wherein the Tribunal held that the service by FICCI 
to its members is not liable for payment of service 
tax owing to ‘Principle of Mutuality’.
(h) AFGIS is controlled by the Govt. of India through the 
Ministry of Defence and Air HQ and hence is “Government” 
in terms of Finance Act, 1994. AFGIS acts as a wing of 
the Government and hence the collection received from 
its members is outside the purview of the service tax 
primarily on the basis of “Principle of Mutuality” and by 
virtue of Section 66 D of the Finance Act, 1994 wherein 
the service of ‘Government’ is outside the purview of the 
Service Tax.
xxx
xxx
xxx”

128
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Air Force instruction dated 1st October 1987 mandating membership 
of AFGIS is as under:-
COPY 
AIR FORCE INSTRUCTION 
NO – 16
New Delhi, Thursday, October 1, 1987/Asavina 9, 1909
COMPULSORY MEMBERSHIP-GROUP INSURANCE 
SCHEME
1.	
The membership under Air Force Group Insurance 
Society for the Insurance Scheme in existence at the 
time of joining Indian Air Force will be compulsory 
for the following:-
(a) Officers
(b) Airmen
(c) NCs(E)
(d) Flight Cadets
2.	
All personnel who are members of Enhanced Group 
Insurance Scheme 1982 of Air Force Group Insurance 
Society shall automatically become members of any 
other Insurance Scheme floated in future by the Air 
Force Group Insurance Society. The will be liable 
to pay insurance premium for the new scheme as 
fixed by the Air Force Group Insurance Society from 
time to time.
3.	
All personnel who are not members of Enhanced 
Group Insurance Scheme 1982 but are members of 
Group Insurance Scheme 1975 or 1978 can become 
members of any new insurance scheme floated by 
Air Force Group Insurance Society after becoming 
members of Enhanced Group Insurance Scheme 
1982, for which they will be required to pay the 
insurance premium applicable for 1982 scheme from 
01 Apr 82 till the date the new schemes come into 
force. Premium paid under 1975 and 1978 Schemes 
will be retained and paid at the time of retirement will 
applicable rates of interest.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
129
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
4.	
These provisions take effect from the date of issue 
of this AFI.
Case No. Air HQ/24018/16/PP&R-1/D (Air-III) 
Min of Def/(Fin) UO No. 1410/Pay/AF of 1987
Sd/- 
(R.K. Dhir) 
Dy Secretary
10.	 For point (c), reference may be made to the Manual of Administration 
and Management, Air Force Group Insurance Society (Published 
under the Authority of Board of Trustees AFGIS) 2009
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
Board of Trustees
1.	
The Society will be administered by a Board of 
Trustees and a Managing Committee as per the 
details given in succeeding paras.
2.	
The Board of Trustees constitute the following:-
AOA — Chairman 
DG(IBS) — Member 
DCAS — Member 
AOM — Member 
AOP — Member 
ACAS (Accts) — Member 
PD AFGIS — Member Secretary
18. Secretary. The Secretary shall be an officer of the 
rank of Gp Capt of the Accounts Branch and will be on 
deputation to the Society as per the terms and conditions 
approved by the Government. His appointment will be 
approved by the Chairman, Board of Trustees. He will 
conduct day to day administration and be responsible to 
Principal Director, AFGIS on all matters of the Society. He 
shall perform the following functions:-
(a) Carry out administrative duties as may be entrusted 
to him by Principal Director, AFGIS.

130
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(b) Give notice of the meeting to the members of Board 
of Trustees/Managing Committee and prepare briefs on 
all agenda points to be sent to the members.
(c) Attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees and 
Managing Committee unless prevented by illness or 
excused from attending by the Chairman and record the 
Minutes of all meetings of the Board of Trustees. 
(d) Communicate decisions of the Board of Trustees/
Managing Committee to concerned executives for 
implementation.
(e) Be responsible for the efficient functioning of Claims, 
Advances, PRIC and Contribution Sections and correct 
maintenance of connected records.
(f) Conduct correspondence o behalf of the Board of 
Trustees and Managing Committee
(g) Finalise and settle all death, disability and survival 
benefit claims duly approved by the appropriate authority.
(h) prepare the annual report of the Society for approval 
by the Board of Trustees.
(j) Perform the duties of Principal Director and JD (Fin) in 
the absence of the permanent incumbent.
(k) Approve expenditure as per the financial powers 
delegated within the overall budget limit approved by the 
Board of Trustees.
(l) Put up proposals for investment of funds of the Society.”
xxx
xxx
xxx
11.	 For points (d), the following letter is extracted:-
11(5)2000/DOI/DOI/D(Air-III) 
Government of India 
Ministry of Defence 
New Delhi dated the 27th Mar 2002
To
The Chief of Air Staff 
(with 15 Spare copies)

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
131
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
Subject: GENERAL TERMS & CONDITIONS FOR 
DEPUTATION OF OFFICERS TO AIR FORCE GROUP 
INSURANCE SOCIETY
Sir,
I am directed to convey the sanction of the President 
to the general Terms & Conditions for deputation of IAF 
officers to Air Force Group Insurance Society as laid down 
in Annexure ‘A’ of this letter.
3. This issues with the concurrence of Ministry of Defence 
(Finance) vide their u.o. No.543/P&W/AF dated 22 Mar 
2002.
Yours faithfully,
(G. Srinivasan) 
Desk Officer
12.	 For point (e) relevant portion of Manual of Administration and 
Management, AFGIS:- 
35. Monitoring System On 25th of every month, PD AFGIS 
is to apprise ACAS (Accts) on the case flow of AFGIS, 
bringing out the details of all investment during the previous 
30 days. He is also to make a structured presentation to 
AOA of investment status, the quotations received during 
the previous quarter along comparative statements, their 
forecast appreciation of the investment environment the 
next quarter and the case flow assessment of the next 
quarter. At the end of every quarter the performance 
analysis of the investment is to be put up to both for their 
perusal.
13.	 For point (g) reference is made to the following letters dated 25th 
February 1985 and 28th September 1981:-
“No.Air HQ/5.18172/22/3/PC-26/Plans/361/DOIIA/
D(Air-III) 
Government of India, 
Ministry of Defence, 
New Delhi, the 25th February, 1985

132
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
To
The Chief of the Air Staff (with 35 spare copies)
SUBSTANTIVE CADRE OF GROUP CAPT AND
ABOVE - DIRECTOR OF GROUP INSURANCE 
SOCIETY
Sir,
I am directed to refer to this Ministry’s letter No. Air 
HQ/S.18172/22/3/Plans/3750/D(Air-III)/62 dated 15th May, 
1974 as amended from time to time and to convey the 
sanction of the President to the inclusion of one post of 
Air Cmde (Accts) in the substantive cadre of Air Cmde 
(Accts) so long the post of director of Group Insurance 
Society is held by an Air Force Office and its deletion from 
the existing substantive cadre/of Group Cap-t (Accts).
2.⁠ ⁠This issues with the concurrence of Ministry of Defence/ 
(Finance/Division)vide their u.o. No. 351/Org/S/AF of 1985.
Yours faithfully,
(H.D. SHARMA)  
DESK OFFICER
xxx
xxx
xxx
Appendix ‘E’ 
(Refers to para 9 of  
Chapter 3)
No. Air HQ/24011/71 PP & R-1/2282/DOIIB/D (Air III)
Government of India/Bharat Sarkar
Ministry of Defence /Raksha Mantralaya 
New Delhi, the 28 September, 1981 
6th Asvina, 1903 Sako Era
To
The Chief of the Air Staff,
Subject: Enhancement of Flying Pay-Air Force Personnel

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
133
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
Sir,
1.⁠ ⁠I am directed to refer to para 9(b) of AFI 4/S/74 as 
amended and Serial No.12 of Appendix ‘B’ to AFI 2/S/74, 
as amended and to state that the president is pleased 
to decide that with effect from 01 Sep 1981, the rates of 
flying pay will be enhanced as under:-
(i) Wing Commander and below
Rs.750.00 pm
(ii) Group Caption and Air Cmde
Rs.666.00 pm
(iii) Air Vice Marshal and above
Rs.600.00 pm
(iv) Airmen including JWOs, WOs and MWOS
Rs.374.50 pm
2.⁠ ⁠The increased flying pay will be admissible subject to 
additional insurance cover as given below, taken through 
Air Force Group Insurance Society (AFGIS):-
(a) Officers of the flying branch are required to obtain 
additional life insurance cover against all risks, 
including flying for a minimum of Rs.2 Lakhs effective 
from 01 Oct 81, on payment of monthly contribution 
as given below:-
(i) Wing Commander and below
Rs.325.00 pm
(ii) Group Captain and Air Cmde
Rs.283.00 pm
(iii) Air Vice Marshal and above
Rs.250.00 pm
(b) Officers of the Ground duty Branches, entitled 
to flying pay will be required to obtain additional life 

134
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
insurance cover against all risks, including flying, for 
a minimum of Rs.2 Lakhs effective from 01 Oct 81, 
on payment of monthly contribution as applicable to 
equivalent ranks of the flying branch only during the 
period of entitlement of flying pay.
(c) Airmen aircrew, entitled to flying pay, will be 
required to obtain additional life insurance cover 
against all risks, including flying for a minimum of 
Rs. One Lakhs effective from 01 Oct 81, on payment 
of monthly contribution of Rs.162.00 only during the 
period of entitlement to flying pay.
(d) The Air Force Group Insurance Society will pay 
Survival Benefit to persons covered under the above 
insurance scheme on retirement/release, the amount 
of which will be determined by the said Society from 
time to time.
3. (a) The amount payable to the Group Insurance Scheme 
is to be recovered from IRLAs of officers and airmen from 
the pay of Sep 81 onwards and paid by the Air Force Central 
accounts Office to Air Force Group Insurance Society in 
respect of personnel for whom IRLAs are maintained, on 
the day pay for the month is disbursed.
(b)	 (i) Deputationists and other officers and airmen for 
whom no IRLAS are maintained at Air Force Central 
Accounts Office and who are entitled to enhance flying 
pay, are to obtain insurance cover for the amounts, 
as applicable by remitting the contributions to Air 
Force Group Insurance Society for the flying pay to 
be admitted.
(ii) In the case of the existing deputationist and other 
officers and airmen for whom no IRLAs are maintained 
by Air Force Central Accounts Office and who are 
entitled for enhanced flying pay contributions are to 
be remitted by them direct to the AFGIS latest by 01 
Jun 82. However, the contributions will have to be 
made wef 01 Oct 81.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
135
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
(iii) In the case of the officers mentioned above whom 
no IRLAs are maintained by AFCAO, the controlling 
officers will admit flying pay only on receiving a 
certificate/receipt from the Air Froce Group Insurance 
Society to the effect that the individual has contributed 
for the month(s) for which flying pay is admitted.
(c) In view of the provisions made in sub paras (a) & 
(b) (iii) above, no certificate of payment of insurance 
premium will be required to be given by OC Unit and no 
POR is necessary, in respect of this additional insurance 
cover. However, the flying pay certificate prescribed in the 
Appendix ‘G’ to AFI 2/S/74 and Appendix ‘C’ to AFI 2/S/74 
will continue to be furnished.
4.⁠ ⁠Other conditions governing flying pay including insurance 
cover required under the earlier orders remain unchanged.
5.⁠ ⁠AFI 4/S 74 and AFI 2/S/74 will be amended in due course.
6.⁠ ⁠This issues with the concurrence of Min of Fin (Def) 
vide their No.2622/Pay/ AA of 1981.
Yours faithfully, 
Sd/-  
(N.N. Mathur)  
Desk Officers
xxx
xxx
xxx”
14.	 For point (h) the Notification dated 31st October 1983 exempting the 
Society from estate duty is extracted below:-
“Appendix ‘D’  
(Refers to para 8  
of Chapter 1)
TO BE PUBLISHED IN PART II SECTION 3-SUB 
SECTION (1) OF THE GAZETTE OF INDIA
Government of India 
Central Board of Direct Taxes 
New Delhi, the 31” October, 1983

136
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
NOTIFICATION 
ESTATE DUTY
GSR 841, Whereas the Central Government is of opinion 
that circumstances are such that some relief in addition 
to the relief provided in sub section (i) of Section 33 of 
the Estate Duty act, 1953 (34 of 1953) should be given 
in respect of the following class of property belonging to 
the deceased which passes on his death and in respect 
of which estate duty is liable to be levied and collected 
under the said Act, namely, the money payable under Army 
Group Insurance Scheme or the Naval Group Insurance 
Scheme or the Air Force Group Insurance Schemes as 
the case may be, in existence on the date of publication 
of this Notification in the Official Gazette. Now, therefore, 
in exercise of the power conferred by sub section (2) of 
the section 33 of the Estate Duty Act, 1953 (34 of 1953), 
the Central Government hereby directs that no estate 
duty shall be payable in respect of the aforesaid class 
of property.
Sd/
(Arvind Pinto)
Under Secretary to the Government of India
(F.No.296/7/83-ED)
Notification dated 5th June 1985 exempting AFGIS from 
income tax, is as under:-
“Appendix ‘B’ 
(Refers to para 7(c) of Chapter 1)
Copy
TO BE PUBLISHED IN PART II SECTION 3 (II) OF 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
MINISTRY OF FINANCE  
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE 
NEW DELHI, TIME 5th JUNE, 1985

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
137
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
NOTIFICATION
INCOME TAX
S.O. In pursuance of sub clause (f) of clause (iii) of sub 
section (3) of section 194A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 
(43 of 1961), the Central Government hereby notifies the 
Society known as Air Force Group Insurance Society, New 
Delhi, for the purpose of the said sub- clause.
(F. No. 275/29/85-IT (B)
Sd/- 
(B.Nagarajan) 
Deputy Secretary to 
the Govt of India
xxx
xxx
xxx”
15.	 In our view, a perusal of the documents extracted supra make out 
a case for AFGIS to be considered ‘State’ within the meaning of 
Article 12. For the aspect of deep and pervasive control, we observe 
that the Hon’ble President of India granted sanction for AFGIS 
to be established and also specifically approved the deputation 
Rules; the Principal Director (AFGIS), every month is to apprise the 
Assistant Chief of Air Staff regarding the cash flow of AFGIS which 
ensures monitoring by a core member of the IAF on the activities 
of AFGIS; the membership and deductions arising therefrom are 
a compulsory aspect of serving in the IAF, meaning thereby that 
there is no choice of the individual officer in that matter and instead 
is a mandate from the employer. When the aspect of administrative 
control is examined, it is seen that all the members of the Board of 
Trustees, so also the Managing Committee are serving members 
of the IAF and are deputed to AFGIS for a fixed period. In essence, 
therefore, the administration of the Body is entirely in the hands of 
Government servants even though the body itself is a purportedly 
private, a self-contained society. The appellant, in submitting that 
financial control also rests with the Government says that since the 
mandatory reduction of the premium is directly/automatically from 
the salary of the members of IAF and these salaries are charged to 
the Consolidated Fund of India- this shows financial control. 

138
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
16.	 We are unable to accept this contention. It may be that in so far as 
financial aspects of AFGIS are concerned, the Government may not 
have a direct role however for a body to be held to be a ‘State’ it 
is the cumulative effect and impact of deep and pervasive control, 
financial and administrative control along with other factors such as 
carrying out of public duty. 
17.	 We are of the considered view that AFGIS does indeed perform a 
public duty. The protection and welfare of armed forces personnel is 
a core government function. The role of the armed forces is directly 
linked to the sovereignty and security of the nation and in protecting 
the same members of the forces are required to adhere to, abide 
by, and maintain a strict set of rules, unquestionable conduct, and at 
times in the most severe and adverse circumstances. Thus, providing 
insurance coverage is a public function as it addresses a collective 
obligation the State has towards a defined public class whose 
service is indispensable. The body, in effect, becomes a conduit for 
the discharge of that obligation. The role of the State in protecting 
them does not end upon their superannuation from service for the 
life of a person from the forces is forever shaped by their time in 
service. Insurance to service members is a critical instrument for 
safeguarding their physical, mental well-being, dignity and economic 
security. It operates as an assurance of protection and support in 
case contingencies such as disability or illness befall them or even 
untimely death which is a real possibility in these services. The fact 
that healthcare, rehabilitation, support to dependants is available 
readily, is undoubtedly an aspect that gives great peace of mind to 
the member of service enabling them to carry out their duties without 
worry, at least in this regard. 
18.	 In addition to the discussion above, it is also seen that at one-
point AFGIS itself claimed to be Government while claiming an 
exemption from service taxes, since it is under the control of Ministry 
of Defence. In effect, by opposing the challenge of the appellants, 
AFGIS has resiled from its own statement. We fail to understand 
an organisation can be ‘Government’ for one purpose and not be, 
for another purpose. 
19.	 Consequent to the above discussion, AFGIS would be ‘State’ under 
Article 12. The writ petition before the High Court accordingly, 
maintainable. The said writ petition on the grievance of the appellants 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
139
Ravi Khokhar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
is restored. The High Court is requested to decide the same 
expeditiously keeping in view the fact that the same has been filed 
in the year 2017. Appeal is allowed.
Pending application(s) if any shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
