[2026] 4 S.C.R. 184 : 2026 INSC 254
Vishvjeet and Others 
v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another
(Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 109 of 2026)
17 March 2026
[Vikram Nath and Sandeep Mehta, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertained to acts of hooliganism by the Barabanki Bar 
Members by attacking advocate representing petitioners in toll 
plaza case.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Article 32 – Conduct of law 
professionals – Acts of hooliganism – Petitioners-contractual 
employees, posted for toll collection duty at the Toll Plaza 
on Lucknow-Sultanpur Highway, in District Barabanki, Uttar 
Pradesh – Advocate-complainant allegedly refused to pay 
requisite toll charges while passing through the toll plaza, and 
a verbal spat and scuffle ensued between the advocate and 
the staff at the toll plaza, and allegations that the petitioners 
assaulted the complainant – Registration of FIR at the instance 
of the complainant for the offences punishable u/ss.115(2), 352, 
351(3), 109(1), 110, 311 and 3(5) BNS – Thereafter, members of 
the Bar Association and Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh started 
violent protests and passed a resolution to the effect that no 
advocate would represent the accused persons in connection 
with the said FIR – However, one advocate, filed bail application 
on behalf of the petitioners – Thereafter, the members of the 
Bar resorted to unruly behaviour and acts of hooliganism and 
arson, by setting the office furniture of the said advocate on 
fire, burnt his effigy, and as such no advocate in Barabanki, or 
even from the nearby places willing to represent the petitioners 
and rather attempts made for representation of the petitioners 
specifically denied, resultantly, the petitioners deprived of 
access to legal remedies in the State – Writ petition u/Art.32 
seeking, inter alia, direction to be released on bail and for 
transfer of the proceedings of the criminal case arising from 
FIR to a competent Court in Delhi:

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
185
Vishvjeet and Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Another
Held: Legal profession, which was once regarded as a noble 
profession, has clearly been tainted and tarnished by the acts of 
hooliganism perpetrated pursuant to the fracas which took place at 
the toll plaza – Sentiment of fraternity amongst the lawyers can be 
understood but that, by no means, can justify the acts of violence 
and lawlessness which ensued when a brave lawyer came forward 
to defend the accused – These deplorable acts of hooliganism by 
the members of the bar at Barabanki deprecated – Disciplinary 
body-Bar Council of India expected to take appropriate steps in 
this regard – Bare perusal of the FIR sufficient to satisfy that it 
was not a case wherein the accused-petitioners could have been 
denied bail – No dispute that the petitioners were performing their 
duties at the toll plaza where the incident happened – Possibility 
cannot be ruled out that the complainant may have resisted the 
attempt of the petitioners in demanding toll (rightly so) resulting 
into a spat between the complainant and the employees of the 
toll plaza-petitioners – In these circumstances, denial of bail to 
the petitioners and the curtailment of their liberty for a period 
exceeding two months absolutely unjustified and violative of the 
fundamental right of liberty guaranteed u/Art.21 warranting exercise 
of the extraordinary writ jurisdiction conferred upon this Court by 
Art.32 – Petitioners to be released on bail, upon furnishing personal 
bonds to the satisfaction of the concerned Magistrate – In order 
to ensure that the accused get proper legal representation and 
fair trial, proceedings arising out of the FIR to be transferred to 
Tis Hazari Courts, New Delhi, for all further actions. [Paras 13-19]
Judicial deprecation – Conduct of law professionals – Acts of 
hooliganism – Deplorable acts of hooliganism by the members 
of the bar at Barabanki – Damage caused to the furniture etc. 
of the advocate, who had filed the bail application on behalf of 
the petitioners – Role of the members of the bar at Barabanki, 
who indulged into hooliganism deprecated and condemned. 
[Paras 14, 19]
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; National 
Security Act, 1980.
List of Keywords
Acts of hooliganism; Members of the Barabanki Bar; Attack on the 
advocate; Toll plaza; Conduct of law professionals; Contractual 

186
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
employees; Toll collection duty at Toll Plaza on Lucknow Sultanpur 
Highway, in District Barabanki, Uttar Pradesh; Refusal to pay 
requisite toll charges; Verbal spat and scuffle between the advocate 
and the staff at the toll plaza; Unruly behaviour by members of the 
Bar; Deprived of access to legal remedies in the State; Release 
on bail; Transfer of proceedings; Judicial deprecation; Damage 
caused to furniture of the advocate.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Criminal) 
No. 109 of 2026
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Petitioner(s):
Md. Asif Iqbal, Iqbal Ahmad, Ms. Sangeeta, Atul Kumar Srivastav, 
Ms. Anu Priya Nisha Minz, Siddhartha Sinha.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Rohit K. Singh, Pritam Bishwas, Kartikey Bansal.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
The custodians of justice (Members of the District Bar Association, 
Barabanki) have turned into perpetrators of violence, which has 
led the petitioners to knock the doors of this Court to protect their 
Fundamental Rights by way of this writ petition under Article 32 of 
the Constitution of India.
2.	
The present writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, 
preferred by the petitioners, presents a sorry state of affairs with 
respect to the conduct of law professionals, particularly in the State 
of Uttar Pradesh. 
3.	
The petitioners are contractual employees of a company, named, 
M/s. Skylark Infra Engineering Pvt. Ltd., and are permanent residents 
of the State of Madhya Pradesh. They were posted for toll collection 
duty at the Gotona Bara Toll Plaza on the Lucknow-Sultanpur Highway, 
in District Barabanki, Uttar Pradesh.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
187
Vishvjeet and Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Another
4.	
On 14th January, 2026, an advocate, namely, Mr. Ratnesh Shukla1, 
allegedly refused to pay the requisite toll charges while passing 
through the said toll plaza. Consequently, a verbal spat ensued 
between the complainant and the staff posted at the toll plaza, which 
subsequently escalated into a scuffle. It is alleged that the petitioners, 
being the employees of the operating company and posted at the 
toll plaza, assaulted the complainant.
5.	
An F.I.R., bearing No. 15/2026 came to be registered at P.S. 
Haidergarh, District Barabanki on 14th January, 2026 at the instance 
of the complainant for the offences punishable under Sections 
115(2), 352, 351(3), 109(1), 110, 311 and 3(5) of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
6.	
It is the case of the petitioners that the grounds of arrest were not 
communicated to them at the time of their arrest. The petitioners were 
thereafter produced before the learned A.C.J.M., Barabanki and were 
remanded to judicial custody by order dated 16th January, 2026. It is 
further averred in the writ petition that the remand proceedings do not 
reflect compliance with the mandatory requirement of communicating 
the grounds of arrest to the accused persons.
7.	
It is also stated that, immediately after the registration of the F.I.R., 
members of the Bar Association started violent protests, as is the 
usual feature these days. Most notably, what is most unfortunate 
is that even the Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh joined the fray and 
addressed a letter to the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh 
requesting invocation of the provisions of National Security Act against 
the petitioners even though the incident pertained to a trivial scuffle.
8.	
It is further stated that a resolution was passed and circulated 
within the local bar to the effect that no advocate would represent 
the accused persons in connection with the FIR No. 15/2026. 
Notwithstanding the aforesaid resolution, one advocate, namely, 
Shri Manoj Shukla, displayed considerable courage and filed a bail 
application on behalf of the petitioners on 5th February, 2026. Shortly 
thereafter, the members of the Bar resorted to unruly behaviour and 
the office furniture of the said advocate was set on fire, and his effigy 
was also burnt. The news relating to these acts of hooliganism and 
1	
hereinafter, being referred to as the ‘complainant’

188
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
arson has been published in the local newspapers, and the copies 
thereof have been annexed with the writ petition. The photographs 
placed on record clearly depict that the furniture of the advocate was 
set to fire. The news report of these incidents as published in the 
‘Dainik Bhaskar’ newspaper, Lucknow City Edition dated 6th February, 
2026, is reproduced hereinbelow for the sake of ready reference: -
“Dainik Bhaskar
Lucknow City 06-02-2026
Lawyers burned the belongings of a colleague who had 
secured bail for the toll employees who assaulted them. 
A commotion ensued when the lawyer secretly filed a bail 
application for the accused. 
A lawyer versus lawyer dispute erupted between lawyers 
on Thursday in the Barabanki district court premises. 
A massive uproar and arson erupted when it was revealed 
that an advocate had filed a bail petition for toll workers, 
going against the Bar Association’s collective decision. 
Hundreds of angry advocates stormed the lawyer’s office 
and set tables and chairs on fire. This incident relates to 
an assault on an advocate at the Haidergarh toll plaza. Toll 
workers not only assaulted the advocate but also abused 
him. Angered by this incident, lawyers from Lucknow and 
Barabanki launched a major protest.
After which the police sent the accused to jail. On Thursday, 
lawyers learned that Advocate Manoj Shukla, in violation 
of the bar’s decision, had secretly filed a bail petition for 
the toll workers in court.
This news heated up the atmosphere. A large group of 
lawyers, led by District Bar Association President Narendra 
Verma, arrived at Mr. Manoj’s desk. Mr. Manoj was not 
present, but the lawyers threw his desk and chairs onto 
the street and set them on fire.”
9.	
The petitioners have submitted that such acts of rampant violence 
by the members of the bar created an atmosphere of fear, and 
thereby dissuaded any further attempts to represent the petitioners. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
189
Vishvjeet and Others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Another
Resultantly, no advocate in Barabanki, or even from the nearby places 
is willing to represent the petitioners and rather attempts made for 
representation of the petitioners have been specifically denied on 
account of atmosphere of fear created by the members of Bar. 
10.	 Resultantly, the petitioners having been deprived of access to legal 
remedies in the State of Uttar Pradesh, have approached this Court 
by way of the instant writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution 
of India, seeking, inter alia, a direction to be released on bail and 
for transfer of the proceedings of the criminal case arising from FIR 
No. 15/2026 registered at P.S. Haidergarh, District Barabanki to a 
competent Court in Delhi. 
11.	 Notice has been served on the respondents and Mr. Rohit K Singh, 
has entered appearance on behalf of the State of Uttar Pradesh. 
12.	 The facts averred in the writ petition have not been denied.
13.	 In view of the emergent nature of the proceedings, wherein personal 
liberty of the Company’s employees, who were bonafide performing 
their duties at a toll plaza, has remained curtailed for more than two 
months, we proceed to hear and decide the writ petition without 
awaiting the reply of the respondents. 
14.	 The facts noted hereinabove reveal a very sorry state of affairs. The 
legal profession, which was once regarded as a noble profession, 
has clearly been tainted and tarnished by the acts of hooliganism 
perpetrated pursuant to the fracas which took place at the toll plaza 
on 14th January, 2026. We can understand the sentiment of fraternity 
amongst the lawyers but that, by no means, can justify the acts of 
violence and lawlessness which ensued when a brave lawyer came 
forward to defend the accused. These deplorable acts of hooliganism 
deserve to be deprecated. The disciplinary body, i.e., the Bar Council 
of India is expected to take appropriate steps in this regard.
15.	 A bare perusal of the FIR is sufficient to satisfy us that it was not a 
case wherein the accused-petitioners could have been denied bail. 
There is no dispute that the petitioners were performing their duties 
at the toll plaza where the incident happened. Possibility cannot 
be ruled out that the complainant may have resisted the attempt 
of the petitioners in demanding toll (rightly so) resulting into a spat 
between the complainant and the employees of the toll plaza i.e., 
the petitioners herein. 

190
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
16.	 In these circumstances, denial of bail to the petitioners and the 
curtailment of their liberty for a period exceeding two months is 
absolutely unjustified and violative of the Fundamental Right of Liberty 
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India warranting 
exercise of the extraordinary writ jurisdiction conferred upon this 
Court by Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
17.	 Resultantly, we hereby direct that the petitioners shall forthwith be 
released on bail, upon furnishing personal bonds to the satisfaction 
of the concerned Magistrate. In order to ensure that the accused 
get proper legal representation and a fair trial, we direct that the 
proceedings arising out of the FIR No.15/2026 shall stand transferred 
to the Tis Hazari Courts, New Delhi, for all further actions, i.e., 
remand, filing of result of investigation, and trial. Upon the case file 
being received in the jurisdictional Court at Tis Hazari Courts, New 
Delhi, the trial Court may set appropriate additional conditions for bail. 
18.	 The Director General of Police, Uttar Pradesh shall be responsible 
for the safety and security of the petitioners, and shall ensure that 
upon their release on bail, the petitioners are duly escorted to a 
safe location. 
19.	 Before parting, we condemn the role of the members of the bar at 
Barabanki, who indulged into hooliganism by damaging the furniture 
etc. of the advocate, who had filed the bail application on behalf of 
the petitioners. 
20.	 The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
21.	 The Registry is directed to forthwith forward a copy of this Order to 
the Director General of Police, Uttar Pradesh and the Bar Council 
of India for compliance/appropriate action. 
22.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Writ petition disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
