[2026] 4 S.C.R. 191 : 2026 INSC 257
Bhola Mahto 
v. 
The State of Jharkhand
(Criminal Appeal No. 1450 of 2026)
16 March 2026
[Dipankar Datta and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Impugned order challenged by the appellant-convict contending 
that as he was not made aware of absence of the counsel 
engaged by him to prosecute the appeal before the Division 
Bench and as the Division Bench proceeded to appoint the 
amicus without his knowledge, he may be allowed to raise all 
such grounds which he had raised in the memorandum of appeal 
that was filed in the High Court to secure an order of setting 
aside the conviction u/s.304 Part II, IPC and the sentence of  
5 years rigorous imprisonment and to allow the appeal by recording 
an acquittal.
Headnotes†
Legal Aid – Appointment of amicus – Notice to convict – 
Appellate court if appoints an amicus to represent a convict 
whose counsel is absent, it may also consider the desirability 
of issuing a notice to the convict
Held: Having regard to the dictum of the three-Judge Bench in 
Anokhi Lal case and in order to curb the tendency of convicts 
to raise technical pleas of the nature which were advanced in 
the present case as not having knowledge of the appointment 
of amicus, whenever an appellate court considers it desirable 
to appoint an amicus to represent a convict whose counsel is 
absent, such court may also consider the desirability of issuing a 
notice from the registry to the address of the convict mentioned 
in the memorandum of appeal, for such notice to be served on 
him through the jurisdictional police station, with an intimation that 
the convict may contact the amicus and provide him necessary 
instructions so that his case is argued before the court effectively 
and meaningfully – In the event the convict contacts the amicus 
and provides instructions, there would ordinarily be no impediment 
in proceeding with hearing of the appeal – If, indeed, the convict 

192
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
desires to have his own counsel argue the appeal on his behalf and 
not the amicus, the court may hear such counsel in addition to the 
amicus – However, if the service report indicates that the convict 
was not found at the address or that he refused to accept notice 
despite being present, it would amount to sufficient compliance if the 
notice is pasted on the outer wall of the premises, address whereof 
is mentioned in the cause title of the memorandum of appeal – 
Should the convict still remain dormant, and it is so reported, the 
High Court may proceed to decide the appeal without waiting for 
the convict to turn up either in person or through the counsel of 
his choice engaged by him – This process would substantially 
serve the purpose of eliminating any plea of unfairness being 
raised before this Court if an appeal is disposed of upon hearing 
the amicus appointed by the court – Additionally, in a case of like 
nature where the appeal is listed two decades after grant of bail, 
this process would ensure obtaining of information as to whether 
the appeal survives for decision or stands abate – In case of 
the latter, the courts could avoid spending precious judicial time 
deciding an appeal which, by operation of law, may not require a 
decision on merits – Of course, for a convict in custody who has 
committed an offence punishable with death or life imprisonment, 
the directions in Anokhi Lal have to be scrupulously followed 
apart from the relevant rules regulating the business of the courts 
concerned. [Para 23]
Legal Aid – Appellant-convict was on bail – His appeal was 
listed for hearing after being pending for more than two 
decades however, since no one appeared on his behalf, 
Division Bench appointed an advocate of more than 15 years’ 
standing as amicus curiae to assist the Court – However, no 
notice was issued to the appellant to the effect that his counsel 
was not appearing to prosecute the appeal and that an amicus 
had been appointed by the Division Bench – Division Bench 
set aside the conviction of the appellant u/s.302, IPC and 
the sentence of life imprisonment; conviction was altered to 
one u/s.304-Part II, IPC and the appellant was sentenced to 5 
years rigorous imprisonment – Challenged by the appellant 
contending that there has been a gross failure of justice as the 
grounds which the appellant had raised in his memorandum of 
appeal filed in the High Court were not urged by the amicus; 
instead, he urged a ground which the appellant had not raised 
in such memorandum and as a result, the Division Bench was 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
193
Bhola Mahto v. The State of Jharkhand
disabled from examining whether the appellant had set up a 
strong case for acquittal:
Held: High Court in its anxiety to deliver justice without further 
delay and to decide the appeal expeditiously upon hearing the 
amicus, had not made an attempt to inform the appellant that his 
appeal having been listed for final hearing (after two decades) and 
there being absence of representation from his side, (on the first 
day) an amicus had been appointed to represent him – High Court 
was under no obligation to inform the appellant of his counsel’s 
absence; however, it would have been a desirable precaution if the 
appellant were so informed – This is more so, because, assistance 
in the form of legal aid should be real and meaningful and not by 
way of a token gesture or to complete an idle formality – None can 
possibly doubt the High Court’s genuine intention to render legal 
assistance to a non-appearing convict by appointing an amicus on 
his behalf to assist the court render justice but, perhaps, justice 
would have been better served if an intimation by way of a notice 
been sent, bearing in mind that the appeal was listed for the first 
time for hearing twenty-one years after the appellant was released 
on bail – Matter remanded for hearing of the appeal de novo – 
Impugned order set aside. [Paras 14, 15]
Case Law Cited
Anokhi Lal v. State of Madhya Pradesh [2019] 18 SCR 1196 : 
(2019) 20 SCC 196 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860.
List of Keywords
Legal aid; Legal assistance to a non-appearing convict; Appointing 
amicus; Appointment of amicus; Notice to convict; Absence of 
representation; Plea of unfairness; Technical pleas.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1450 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 02.12.2024 of the High Court 
of Jharkhand at Ranchi in CRADB No.58 of 2003

194
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Harsh Kaushik, Arpit Srivastava.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Pallavi Langar, Kumar Anurag Singh, Sujeet Kumar Chaubey, 
Zain A Khan, Dev Aaryan, Mohd. Abran Khan.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Appellant challenges the judgment and order dated 2nd December, 
20241 of the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi2, which was rendered 
while disposing of his appeal3 under Section 374(2), Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. While partly allowing such appeal by setting aside 
the conviction recorded by the relevant sessions court against the 
appellant under Section 302, Indian Penal Code, 18604 and the 
sentence of life imprisonment, a Division Bench of the High Court 
altered the conviction to one under Section 304 - Part II, IPC and 
sentenced the appellant to 5 years rigorous imprisonment. 
3.	
While hearing the appeal, we are reminded of the expression “give 
him an inch and he will ask for a mile”. 
4.	
Having regard to the final order we propose to pass, it is not 
considered necessary to examine the appeal on its own merits by 
appreciating and analysing the evidence – oral and documentary – 
presented at the trial. Suffice it to note, the appellant was convicted 
by the relevant sessions court on 25th November, 2002 in respect 
of the crime of murder committed by him on 28th October, 2000, 
whereafter he carried such conviction before the High Court in 
appeal in the early part of 2003 itself. It was initially considered on 
21st January, 2003 and then on 25th February, 2003. Right from 29th 
1	
impugned order
2	
High Court
3	
CRADB No. 58 of 2003
4	
IPC

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
195
Bhola Mahto v. The State of Jharkhand
October, 2000, the appellant was in pre-trial custody. The custody 
certificate reveals that he was released from custody on 10th March, 
2003. Though the relevant order is not on record, we find from 
the impugned order that the appellant was on bail. It is, therefore, 
assumed that he obtained an order for suspension of sentence and 
was consequently released on bail. For long 20 years thence, the 
appeal was not listed for hearing. Ultimately, the appeal came to be 
listed before a Division Bench of the High Court on 14th November, 
2024. The order passed on that day records that none had appeared 
on behalf of the appellant despite repeated calls. The appeal having 
been filed in 2003, the Division Bench appointed an advocate of 
more than 15 years’ standing as amicus curiae5 to assist the Court. 
Office was directed to hand over the soft copy of the entire brief 
to the amicus and the appeal was directed to be relisted after two 
weeks. The name of the amicus was also directed to be reflected 
in the cause list on behalf of the appellant.
5.	
The learned amicus argued the appeal on 2nd December, 2024. He 
raised the point that the “case cannot come within the purview of 
Section 302” of the IPC. According to him, insofar as the weapon 
of offence is concerned, the evidence of PW-2 on the one hand 
and the PW-3 and PW-4 on the other were contradictory. That 
apart, the entire incident occurred in the heat of passion when a 
sudden quarrel had taken place due to watering of the field; hence, 
Exception 4 of Section 300, IPC would be attracted in the case. 
Learned counsel appearing for the State opposed the appeal and 
argued that having regard to the nature of injuries suffered by the 
deceased (four blows on the head and one on the leg), there was 
clear intention of the appellant to commit murder. The discrepancy 
pointed out insofar as the weapon of offence is concerned, counsel 
argued, was immaterial. Since the statement of the autopsy surgeon 
(PW-1) suggested that the cause of death was due to shock and 
haemorrhage caused by hard and blunt substance, it substantiated 
and corroborated the oral evidence of PW-3 and PW-4. Dismissal 
of the appeal was, accordingly, prayed.
6.	
Upon threadbare consideration of the evidence led at the trial, the 
Division Bench formed the opinion that the case falls within Exception 
5	
amicus

196
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
4 of Section 300, IPC. Accordingly, the conviction for murder was 
set aside and substituted by recording conviction under Section 304 
Part - II with a reduced sentence of imprisonment, as noted above. 
Since the appellant was on bail during pendency of the appeal, 
such concession was withdrawn and he was directed to forthwith 
surrender to serve the rest of the sentence, if not already served.
7.	
The custody certificate dated 16th August, 2025 reveals that as on 
that date, the appellant suffered incarceration for two years eleven 
months twenty-seven days. Today, the appellant has served a little less 
than three years seven months out of the prison term of five years. 
8.	
When the special leave petition, out of which this appeal arises, was 
taken up for consideration on 7th November, 2025, learned counsel for 
the appellant had informed a coordinate bench of this Court that the 
appellant had not been made aware of absence of learned counsel 
engaged by him to prosecute the appeal before the Division Bench 
and that such bench proceeded to appoint the amicus without the 
appellant’s knowledge. Hearing the same, the coordinate bench had 
the occasion to call for a report from the registry of the High Court 
as to whether the statement of the appellant is correct. 
9.	
A report dated 19th November, 2025 has since been filed by the 
Registrar General of the High Court. On a reading thereof, it does 
appear that no notice was issued to the appellant to the effect that 
his learned counsel was not appearing to prosecute the appeal and 
that an amicus had been appointed by the Division Bench. 
10.	 On perusal of such report, notice was issued on 24th November, 2025.
11.	 At the hearing today, learned counsel for the appellant vehemently 
contends that there has been a gross failure of justice, in that the 
appellant has suffered prejudice by not being meted out fair treatment. 
The grounds which the appellant had raised in his memorandum of 
appeal filed in the High Court were not urged by the learned amicus; 
instead, he urged a ground which the appellant had not raised in such 
memorandum. As a result, the Division Bench was disabled from 
examining whether the appellant had set up a strong case for acquittal.
12.	 Learned counsel, therefore, urges that he may be allowed to raise 
all such grounds which the appellant had raised in the memorandum 
of appeal that was filed in the High Court before us to secure an 
order of setting aside the conviction under Section 304 Part – II, IPC 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
197
Bhola Mahto v. The State of Jharkhand
and the sentence of 5 years rigorous imprisonment and to allow the 
appeal by recording an acquittal.
13.	 We are not prepared to accept this argument. It is true that whatever 
grounds the appellant did raise in the memorandum of appeal were 
not urged before the High Court by the learned amicus. However, 
nothing turns on it. If such grounds have not been urged, the blame 
cannot be placed on the learned amicus. The learned amicus came 
to be appointed by the High Court when it was noticed that the 
appeal remained pending for more than two decades and there was 
no representation from the side of the appellant despite repeated 
calls. In his wisdom, the learned amicus urged only one ground and 
succeeded. We see nothing wrong in the approach of the learned 
amicus. Also, the approach of the High Court endeavouring to expedite 
a decision on the appeal is not unjustified. Appellant was enjoying 
the concession of bail for two decades without being in any manner 
concerned about the fate of his appeal. It was not a case where the 
appellant was in custody and, thus, disabled or inconvenienced to 
contact his counsel to argue the appeal. Appellant, while enlarged 
on bail, has himself to blame for not keeping track of his appeal 
and by not persuading the High Court to decide the appeal at an 
early date, considering the vehemence with which learned counsel 
seeks to argue before us that the appellant merits an acquittal based 
on the multiple grounds raised in the memorandum of appeal. We 
hasten to add that whatever be the worth of the grounds so raised, 
the appellant cannot appeal to us to consider the same for the 
first time once it is found that such grounds were not pressed for 
consideration by the High Court.
14.	 Having held so, we find that the High Court in its anxiety to deliver 
justice without further delay and to decide the appeal expeditiously 
upon hearing the learned amicus, had not made an attempt to inform 
the appellant that his appeal having been listed for final hearing 
(after two decades) and there being absence of representation 
from his side, (on the first day) an amicus had been appointed to 
represent him. The High Court was under no obligation to inform the 
appellant of his counsel’s absence; however, it would have been a 
desirable precaution if the appellant were so informed. This is more 
so, because, this Court has taken the view that assistance in the 
form of legal aid should be real and meaningful and not by way of 
a token gesture or to complete an idle formality. None can possibly 

198
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
doubt the High Court’s genuine intention to render legal assistance 
to a non-appearing convict by appointing an amicus on his behalf 
to assist the court render justice but, perhaps, justice would have 
been better served if an intimation by way of a notice been sent, 
bearing in mind that the appeal was listed for the first time for hearing 
twenty-one years after the appellant was released on bail.
15.	 We are, therefore, inclined to order a remand for hearing of the 
appeal de novo. The impugned order dated 2nd December, 2024 
is set aside with the result that the appellant’s appeal shall stand 
revived on the file of the High Court. It shall be decided in the manner 
observed hereafter.
16.	 Preferably, the very same member Judges of the Division Bench who 
had the occasion to decide the appeal on 2nd December, 2024, may 
be assigned to hear the appeal, subject to their availability. If such 
assignment is not possible or is unworkable, we request the Chief 
Justice of the High Court to assign the appeal to a Division Bench 
of which at least one of the member Judges, who earlier decided 
the appellant’s appeal, forms the quorum.
17.	 Since the appellant wishes to be represented by his own counsel 
before the Division Bench, there shall be no need to appoint an 
amicus if such counsel does not turn up to press the appeal on the 
date to be notified a week in advance by the Registry. In the unlikely 
event of the appellant being unrepresented again, the Division Bench 
would be well advised to decide the appeal in such manner it thinks 
fit and proper. 
18.	 Having regard to the fact that the incident of crime dates back to 28th 
October, 2000 and that the appellant claims to be a septuagenarian 
by now, it would be eminently desirable if the Division Bench decides 
the appeal as early as possible from the date of first hearing. All 
points on merit are kept open to be urged by the appellant and the 
respondent before the High Court. While deciding the appeal, the 
High Court may not be influenced by the observations/findings made 
in the impugned order dated 2nd December, 2024.
19.	 Appellant was released from custody on 10th March, 2003 during 
pendency of the appeal and taken back into custody on 30th December, 
2024 when the appeal was dismissed by the impugned order dated 
2nd December, 2024. In view thereof and since the impugned order 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
199
Bhola Mahto v. The State of Jharkhand
has been set aside, the status quo ante ought to be restored. He 
be released on bail forthwith, subject to such terms and conditions 
as are imposed by the trial court. 
20.	 We clarify that the liberty of the appellant shall not be curtailed till 
such time the appeal is disposed of by the Division Bench on its 
own merits in terms of this order. 
21.	 Accordingly, the appeal stands partly allowed on the aforesaid terms. 
Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
22.	 Before parting, we wish to refer to the decision of this Court reported 
in Anokhi Lal vs. State of Madhya Pradesh6. A three-Judge Bench 
speaking through Hon’ble U.U. Lalit, J. (as the learned Chief Justice 
then was) poignantly observed as follows:
26. Expeditious disposal is undoubtedly required in criminal 
matters and that would naturally be part of guarantee of fair 
trial. However, the attempts to expedite the process should 
not be at the expense of the basic elements of fairness 
and the opportunity to the accused, on which postulates, 
the entire criminal administration of justice is founded. In 
the pursuit for expeditious disposal, the cause of justice 
must never be allowed to suffer or be sacrificed. What is 
paramount is the cause of justice and keeping the basic 
ingredients which secure that as a core idea and ideal, 
the process may be expedited, but fast tracking of process 
must never ever result in burying the cause of justice.
Thereafter, the Court proceeded to lay down norms to avoid repetition 
of infirmities noticed in the case under consideration. It was said thus: 
31. Before we part, we must lay down certain norms so 
that the infirmities that we have noticed in the present 
matter are not repeated:
31.1. In all cases where there is a possibility of life 
sentence or death sentence, learned advocates who have 
put in minimum of 10 years’ practice at the Bar alone be 
considered to be appointed as Amicus Curiae or through 
legal services to represent an accused.
6	
(2019) 20 SCC 196

200
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
31.2. In all matters dealt with by the High Court concerning 
confirmation of death sentence, Senior Advocates of the 
Court must first be considered to be appointed as Amicus 
Curiae.
31.3. Whenever any learned counsel is appointed as 
Amicus Curiae, some reasonable time may be provided to 
enable the counsel to prepare the matter. There cannot be 
any hard-and-fast rule in that behalf. However, a minimum 
of seven days’ time may normally be considered to be 
appropriate and adequate.
31.4. Any learned counsel, who is appointed as Amicus 
Curiae on behalf of the accused must normally be granted 
to have meetings and discussion with the accused 
concerned. Such interactions may prove to be helpful as 
was noticed in Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan [(2018) 9 SCC 160].
23.	 In continuation of the above and in the light of what has transpired 
in course of the present proceedings, we wish to make an additional 
observation. It is a matter of common knowledge that once a convict 
obtains an order from the appellate court suspending the sentence 
of imprisonment and is, consequently, released on bail, more often 
than not, he neglects and/or fails to cooperate with the court and 
impedes an expeditious decision on his appeal by staying away from 
the proceedings with a view to ensure that his liberty is not curtailed, 
if the appeal were to fail. Drawing from experience, we can record 
that on many an occasion, such convicts become untraceable. These 
convicts, enjoying the concession of bail and misusing it, need to 
be dealt with firm and strong hands by the courts. Having regard to 
the dictum of the three-Judge Bench in Anokhi Lal (supra) and in 
order to curb the tendency of convicts to raise technical pleas of the 
nature which were advanced before us, we observe that, henceforth, 
whenever an appellate court considers it desirable to appoint an 
amicus to represent a convict whose counsel is absent, such court 
may also consider the desirability of issuing a notice from the registry 
to the address of the convict mentioned in the memorandum of appeal, 
for such notice to be served on him through the jurisdictional police 
station, with an intimation that the convict may contact the learned 
amicus and provide him necessary instructions so that his case is 
argued before the court effectively and meaningfully. In the event 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
201
Bhola Mahto v. The State of Jharkhand
the convict contacts the amicus and provides instructions, there 
would ordinarily be no impediment in proceeding with hearing of 
the appeal. If, indeed, the convict desires to have his own counsel 
argue the appeal on his behalf and not the amicus, the court may 
hear such counsel in addition to the amicus. However, if the service 
report indicates that the convict was not found at the address or that 
he refused to accept notice despite being present, it would amount 
to sufficient compliance if the notice is pasted on the outer wall of 
the premises, address whereof is mentioned in the cause title of the 
memorandum of appeal. Should the convict still remain dormant, and 
it is so reported, the High Court may proceed to decide the appeal 
without waiting for the convict to turn up either in person or through 
the counsel of his choice engaged by him. This process, in our 
view, would substantially serve the purpose of eliminating any plea 
of unfairness being raised before this Court if an appeal is disposed 
of upon hearing the amicus appointed by the court. Additionally, in 
a case of like nature where the appeal is listed two decades after 
grant of bail, this process would ensure obtaining of information as 
to whether the appeal survives for decision or stands abated. In 
case of the latter, the courts could avoid spending precious judicial 
time deciding an appeal which, by operation of law, may not require 
a decision on merits. Of course, for a convict in custody who has 
committed an offence punishable with death or life imprisonment, the 
directions in Anokhi Lal (supra) have to be scrupulously followed 
apart from the relevant rules regulating the business of the courts 
concerned. 
24.	 We hope and trust that a similar situation does not arise in future.
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
