[2026] 4 S.C.R. 249 : 2026 INSC 266
Virinder Pal Singh 
v. 
Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 3571 of 2026)
19 March 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Manoj Misra,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
(i) Whether post-retirement of the appellant, punishment of 
reduction of three stages in the scale of pay, as imposed by the 
respondent, was permissible under the extant Service Regulations, 
or action under the Pension Regulations was the only way forward;  
(ii) Whether there is any perversity/infirmity in the enquiry report 
and the order(s) passed by the Disciplinary/Appellate Authority. 
If yes, whether it could be raised as a ground when it was not 
pressed before the High Court.
Headnotes†
Punjab and Sind Bank Officers’ Service Regulations, 1982 – 
r.20(3)(iii) – Appellant while in service of first respondent-
bank was served a charge sheet on 30.09.2011, inter alia, 
on allegation of irregularities in disbursement of loans – On 
30.09.2011 itself, the appellant superannuated from service – 
However, the disciplinary proceedings continued – By order 
dated 15.06.2013, punishment of reduction by three stages 
in the time scale of pay, on permanent basis, was imposed 
upon the appellant – Appeal against the said order was 
dismissed by the Appellate Authority – Writ petition filed 
by the appellant herein was allowed by the Single Judge of 
the High Court – However, the Division Bench of the High 
Court held that the extant Service Regulations permitted 
continuance of disciplinary proceedings post attainment of the 
age of superannuation, therefore the disciplinary proceedings 
could continue and brought to its logical conclusion as per 
Punjab and Sind Bank Officers’ Service Regulations, 1982 – 
Correctness:
* Author

250
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: In the instant case, as there was no challenge to the indictment 
that huge amount of cash withdrawals was allowed without taking 
supporting bills/receipts, the charge that the appellant had failed to 
ensure end use of the loan stood proved – Appellant while assailing 
the disciplinary action pressed only one ground i.e., that the extant 
Discipline and Appeal Regulations/Service Regulations under 
which the punishment was imposed, applied to serving employees 
only – Besides, a bank officer holds a position of trust as he deals 
with public funds – Sanction of loan beyond one’s power, or not 
ensuring end-use of the loan, amounts to financial irregularity which 
exposes the Bank to financial risk – Therefore, penal action on proof 
of such a charge cannot be questioned merely because no loss is 
suffered by the Bank – This Court finds that there is neither any 
perversity in the finding(s) returned by the Inquiry Officer nor do 
this Court deems it appropriate to permit the appellant to question 
the merit of the finding(s) that Charge No.2 (appellant had failed 
to ensure the end use of the loan) was partly proved, particularly 
when no such plea was pressed before the High Court – In the 
instant case, the punishment awarded is of reducing the pay scale 
by three stages on permanent basis – Such reduction in the pay 
scale would relate back to the date the incumbent superannuated 
from service – Ordinarily, pension is computed based on salary 
last drawn/payable – Therefore, in view of this Court, it would not 
be difficult to implement such a punishment as pension can be 
computed accordingly. [Paras 18, 19, 21, 37]
Punjab and Sind Bank Officers’ Service Regulations, 1982 – 
r.20(3)(iii) – Post retirement continuation of the disciplinary 
proceedings:
Held: In view of this Court, what is settled is that if the extant 
service Rules/Regulations permit continuance of the disciplinary 
proceedings, initiated against an officer/ employee before he had 
attained the age of superannuation, those can be continued and 
brought to its logical conclusion even after he had attained the age 
of superannuation – And where, pursuant to such proceedings, the 
ultimate penalty imposed is of dismissal, there may be no technical 
difficulty in its implementation as it may result in forfeiture of pension 
and other retiral dues – Therefore, in such an event, the question of 
entitlement to pensionary benefits may not arise – However, where 
the punishment imposed is such which may, instead of forfeiture 
of pension in its entirety, result in mere reduction or adjustment of 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
251
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
pension, or recovery from post retiral dues, the Court may have 
to consider whether such punishment is implementable or not, 
post-retirement. [Para 36]
Case Law Cited
UCO Bank and Others v. Prabhakar Sadashiv Karvade (2018) 14 
SCC 98; Ramesh Chandra Sharma v. Punjab National Bank and 
Another [2007] 7 SCR 585 : (2007) 9 SCC 15; Chairman-Cum-
Managing Director, Mahanadi Coalfields Limited v. Rabindranath 
Choubey [2020] 8 SCR 1 : (2020) 18 SCC 71 – relied on.
A.L. Kalra v. Project and Equipment Corporation of India Limited 
[1984] 3 SCR 646 : (1984) 3 SCC 316; Allahabad Bank and 
Others v. Krishna Narayan Tewari [2017] 1 SCR 389 : (2017) 
2 SCC 308; Securities and Exchange Board of India through 
its Chairman v. Roofit Industries Limited [2015] 12 SCR 190 : 
(2016) 12 SCC 125; Chittoori Subbanna v. Kudappa Subbanna 
and Others [1965] 2 SCR 661 : AIR 1965 SC 1325 : 1964 SCC 
OnLine SC 322; Canara Bank v. D.R.P. Sundharam (2016) 12 
SCC 724; Union of India and Others v. Ram Karan [2021] 7 SCR 
300 : (2022) 1 SCC 373; Disciplinary Authority-Cum-Regional 
Manager and Others v. Nikunja Bihari Patnaik [1996] Supp. 1 SCR 
314 : (1996) 9 SCC 69; Mihir Kumar Hazara Choudhury v. Life 
Insurance Corporation and Another [2017] 9 SCR 418 : (2017) 9 
SCC 404; Chairman and Managing Director, United Commercial 
Bank and Others v. P.C. Kakkar [2003] 1 SCR 1034 : (2003) 4 
SCC 364 – referred to.
List of Acts
Punjab and Sind Bank Officers’ Service Regulations, 1982.
List of Keywords
Service Law; Post-retirement; Reduction in Scale of pay; 
Service regulations; Pension regulations; Enquiry report; Loan 
disbursal; Financial irregularity; Penal action; Last Drawn Pay; 
Superannuation; Fiduciary Duty.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3571 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.02.2023 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in LPA No. 370 of 2018

252
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Vivek Singh, C.P. Rajwar, Ms. Udita Singh, Rohan Chandra.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Rajesh Kumar Gautam, Anant Gautam, Deepanjal Choudhary,  
Ms. Likivi Jakhalu, Kushagra Nilesh Sahay.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manoj Misra, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal impugns judgment and order of the High Court of Punjab 
and Haryana at Chandigarh1 dated 23.02.2023 in LPA No. 370 of 
2018 which arose out of CWP No. 12865 of 2014.
FACTS
3.	
In brief, facts relevant for deciding this appeal are as follows:
(i)	
The appellant while in service of Punjab & Sind Bank2 i.e., the 
first respondent was served a charge sheet on 30.09.2011, inter 
alia, on allegation of irregularities in disbursement of loans. 
(ii)	
On 30.09.2011 itself, the appellant superannuated from service. 
However, the disciplinary proceedings continued and one of the 
charges, namely, Charge No. 2, that is the appellant had failed 
to ensure the end use of the loan, was found partly proved. 
Consequently, vide order dated 15.06.2013, punishment of 
reduction by three stages in the time scale of pay, on permanent 
basis, was imposed upon the appellant. 
(iii)	 Aggrieved therewith, the appellant preferred an appeal before 
the Appellate Authority which was dismissed by order dated 
19.04.2014. Thereafter, the appellant preferred a writ petition 
i.e., CWP No. 12865/2014 before the High Court, which was 
heard by a Single Judge Bench of the High Court.
1	
High Court
2	
Bank 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
253
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
(iv)	 Before the learned Single Judge, the appellant, inter alia, urged 
that the penalty imposed upon him was not permissible as he 
had superannuated. Post retirement, penalties specified in the 
Punjab and Sind Bank Employees’ Pension Regulations, 19953 
alone could be imposed.
(v)	
The aforesaid argument was accepted by the learned Single 
Judge. In consequence, the punishment order was set aside 
while reserving the right of the Bank to issue a fresh show cause 
notice for action under the Pension Regulations.
(vi)	 Aggrieved therewith, the Bank preferred an intra court appeal 
before the Division Bench of the High Court.
(vii)	 The Division Bench by relying upon a three-Judge Bench 
decision of this Court in Chairman-Cum-Managing Director, 
Mahanadi Coalfields Limited v. Rabindranath Choubey4 
and Regulation 20(3)(iii) of the Punjab and Sind Bank Officers’ 
Service Regulations, 19825 held that the extant Service 
Regulations permitted continuance of disciplinary proceedings 
post attainment of the age of superannuation, therefore the 
disciplinary proceedings could continue and brought to its logical 
conclusion as per those Regulations. As a result, the order of 
the learned Single Judge was set aside, and the writ petition 
of the appellant was dismissed. 
(viii)	 Aggrieved by the order of the Division Bench, the appellant is 
before us.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
4.	
On behalf of the appellant, it was submitted that once the appellant had 
attained the age of superannuation, the master-servant relationship 
between the Bank and the appellant ceased to exist, therefore, 
the punishment of reduction of pay could not have been imposed. 
Though the Bank could have either reduced the pension, otherwise 
payable, or recover the loss, if any, caused to the Bank, under the 
Pension Regulations. 
3	
Pension Regulations.
4	
(2020) 18 SCC 71
5	
Service Regulations. 

254
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
5.	
Reliance was placed on a decision of this Court in Ramesh Chandra 
Sharma v. Punjab National Bank and another6 to contend that for 
the purposes of proceeding with disciplinary action post-retirement, 
punishment of dismissal from service stands on a different footing 
than reduction of pay, as by dismissal the liability to pay pension also 
ceases. Reliance was also placed on UCO Bank and others vs. 
Prabhakar Sadashiv Karvade7 to contend that Service Regulations 
apply to serving employees only. 
6.	
It was next contended that the appellant had taken multiple other 
grounds (i.e., (a) the concerned charge was not proved; (b) the 
concerned charge was not relatable to any specified misconduct; 
and (c) the punishment as well as the appellate order was a non-
speaking one), which the High Court failed to address. To buttress 
the submission that disciplinary /Appellate Authority’s order must 
carry reasons, reliance was placed on decisions of this Court in A.L. 
Kalra v. Project and Equipment Corporation of India Limited8 
and Allahabad Bank and others v. Krishna Narayan Tewari9. 
7.	
It was also contended that even if the merits of the finding(s) returned 
by the Inquiry Officer, Disciplinary Authority and Appellate Authority 
was not specifically questioned before the High Court, it being a pure 
question of law can be raised at any stage. In this regard, reliance 
was placed on decisions of this Court in Securities and Exchange 
Board of India through its Chairman v. Roofit Industries Limited10 
and Chittoori Subbanna v. Kudappa Subbanna and others11.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE BANK
8.	
Per contra, the learned counsel for the Bank submitted that the general 
principle that there could be no disciplinary action post termination 
of master-servant relationship, consequent to attaining the age of 
superannuation, has an exception, which is, that if the extant Service 
Rules/Regulations permit continuance of disciplinary proceedings 
6	
(2007) 9 SCC 15
7	
(2018) 14 SCC 98
8	
(1984) 3 SCC 316
9	
(2017) 2 SCC 308
10	
(2016) 12 SCC 125
11	
AIR 1965 SC 1325 : 1964 SCC OnLine SC 322

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
255
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
post attainment of the age of superannuation, the proceedings can 
continue and brought to its logical conclusion. Regulation 20(3)
(iii) of the Service Regulations permits continuance of disciplinary 
proceedings against the charged-officer even post-superannuation, 
if those were initiated prior to incumbent’s superannuation, as is 
the case here. It was contended that in Ramesh Chandra Sharma 
(supra), this Court held that in view of the provisions of Regulation 
20(3)(iii) it is permissible to continue with the disciplinary proceedings 
post-retirement. Same view has been taken by a three-Judge Bench 
of this Court in Canara Bank v. D.R.P. Sundharam12. On the other 
hand, Pension Regulations become applicable when proceedings 
are initiated under the Pension Regulations.
9.	
It was next contended that the decision in Prabhakar Sadashiv 
Karvade (supra) relied by the appellant is distinguishable on facts 
inasmuch as in that case the charged-officer had retired before service 
of charge-sheet. In that context, it was held that extant Regulations 
would apply to only serving employees. 
10.	 On merits of the charge and the orders passed by the Disciplinary/
Appellate Authority, it was submitted that the Inquiry Officer in his 
report dated 20.12.2012 found Charge No. 2 partly proved because 
the borrower had made cash withdrawals of several lacs of rupees 
without supporting bills. In that context, the Inquiry Officer concluded 
that the charged officer had failed to ensure end-use of the loan 
amount. The said conclusion is logical and cannot be held perverse. 
More so, when the loan account had turned Non-Performing Asset (for 
short, NPA). It was submitted that diversion of loan is best prevented 
by ensuring that it is used for the purpose intended. Withdrawal by 
cash, without supporting bills, is a clear indication of misuse of loan 
amount. Moreover, the appellant had never questioned the finding 
qua cash withdrawals without supporting bills.
11.	 Besides, the punishment imposed on the appellant had resulted in 
reduction of pension by a meagre sum of Rs. 302 per month. Thus, 
the punishment is not shockingly disproportionate to the gravity of 
the proven misconduct. Further, as to what punishment is to be 
imposed, the discretion vests with the disciplinary authority. In this 
12	
(2016) 12 SCC 724

256
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
regard decision of this Court in Union of India And Others v. Ram 
Karan13 was relied upon. Based on the aforesaid submissions, it was 
prayed on behalf of the Bank that the appeal be dismissed.
ANALYSIS
12.	 We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused 
the materials on record.
13.	 On consideration of the rival submissions, in our view, following 
issues arise for our determination:
(i)	
Whether post-retirement of the appellant, punishment of 
reduction of three stages in the scale of pay, as imposed by 
the respondent, was permissible under the extant Service 
Regulations, or action under the Pension Regulations was the 
only way forward? 
(ii)	
Whether there is any perversity/infirmity in the enquiry report 
and the order(s) passed by the Disciplinary/Appellate Authority? 
If yes, whether it could be raised as a ground when it was not 
pressed before the High Court? 
14.	 Before proceeding to address Issue No. (i), we would address Issue 
No. (ii) as it turns on facts. Issue No. (ii) relates to the merits of the 
Inquiry Report and the order(s) of the Disciplinary/Appellate Authority. 
It also relates to the consequence of High Court not addressing 
the same. In this regard, it be noted that the charge which stood 
proved was in respect of appellant’s failure to ensure end use of 
the loan disbursed by the Bank. The Inquiry Officer held the charge 
as partly proved because Bills in respect of cash payments of up 
to Rs. 27.25 lacs were not on record, and it was reported that the 
account had turned NPA. 
15.	 The enquiry report14 takes note of the evidence produced and the 
submissions made by both sides. After analyzing the same, it holds 
Charge No. 2 partly proved. The enquiry report is in respect of two 
charges. Charge No. 1 is held not proved whereas Charge No. 2 
is held partly proved because there existed no Bills on record to 
13	
(2022) 1 SCC 373
14	
Which is contained in Annexure P-6

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
257
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
demonstrate as to how the cash was spent. Based on that, the Inquiry 
Officer concluded that there was failure on part of the appellant to 
ensure end-use of the loan amount. 
16.	 The appellant was given opportunity to submit his comments on the 
Inquiry Report. In his comments to the Inquiry Report, the appellant 
did not claim that he was not given due opportunity of hearing or 
that a faulty procedure was adopted by the Inquiry Officer. In fact, he 
did not even challenge the finding of the Inquiry Officer that no Bills 
were there on record. Rather his stand was that his predecessor-
in-office had also not taken Bills, but no objection was taken to his 
predecessor’s conduct. In that backdrop, the disciplinary authority, 
while accepting the finding of the Inquiry Officer, imposed the 
punishment in question. 
17.	 Ensuring end-use of loan disbursals serves multiple purposes. First, 
it ensures that loan is not diverted for purposes other than the one 
for which it is sanctioned/ disbursed. Often loans are prioritized for 
a particular purpose. Ensuring end use safeguards that purpose. 
Second, it secures recovery. For example, if loan is for purchase of 
a machine to run a business, if the machine is purchased, possibility 
of business yielding profits is greater than where the loan is diverted 
for purposes other than to serve the business. Besides, it is a matter 
of common knowledge that loan is sanctioned after appraisal of 
the project or the business in respect of which the loan is sought. 
Appraisal is often to ascertain the feasibility and viability of the 
project / business for which the loan is sought. Failure to ensure end 
use would render the appraisal meaningless. In such circumstances, 
if end use of the loan is not ensured, the Bank would be exposed 
to financial risk. 
18.	 In the instant case, as there was no challenge to the indictment 
that huge amount of cash withdrawals was allowed without taking 
supporting bills/receipts, the charge that the appellant had failed 
to ensure end use of the loan stood proved. It was in this context, 
probably, the learned counsel for appellant while assailing the 
disciplinary action pressed only one ground i.e., that the extant 
Discipline and Appeal Regulations/Service Regulations under which 
the punishment was imposed, applied to serving employees only. 
Even before the Division Bench of the High Court, it appears, no 
argument was raised on the merit of the finding that Charge No. 2 
was partly proved. 

258
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
19.	 Besides, a bank officer holds a position of trust as he deals with 
public funds. Sanction of loan beyond one’s power, or not ensuring 
end-use of the loan, amounts to financial irregularity which exposes 
the Bank to financial risk. Therefore, penal action on proof of such 
a charge cannot be questioned merely because no loss is suffered 
by the Bank15. 
20.	 Moreover, where an employee of a Bank handles money of 
depositors /customers/investors, it is most essential for him to be 
cautious and not reckless in discharge of his duties because he 
deals with the money for and on behalf of his employer. Every such 
employee/officer is, therefore, required to take all possible steps to 
protect the interests of his employer. He must, therefore, discharge his 
duties with utmost sense of integrity, honesty, devotion and diligence 
and must ensure that he does nothing, which is unbecoming of an 
employee/officer. Although good conduct and discipline is expected 
from every employee/officer of an institution, but it is required more 
when the institution deals with money of customers/ depositors/
investors. Any dereliction in discharge of duties by such an employee 
or officer, whether by way of negligence/casualness, or with deliberate 
intention, constitutes misconduct16.
21.	 In that backdrop, we find neither any perversity in the finding(s) 
returned by the Inquiry Officer nor do we deem it appropriate to 
permit the appellant to question the merit of the finding(s) that Charge 
No. 2 was partly proved, particularly when no such plea was pressed 
before the High Court. 
22.	 For the aforesaid reasons, we decline to accept appellant’s 
submissions that the Writ Court and the Division Bench of the High 
Court failed in their obligation to examine the merits of the disciplinary 
action. Moreover, upon consideration of the enquiry report and the 
comments of the appellant to the same, we do not find any good 
ground to hold that Charge No. 2, as discussed above, was not 
partly proved, or that the punishment awarded was shockingly 
disproportionate to the gravity of proven misconduct. Issue No. (ii) 
is decided in the above terms.
15	
Disciplinary Authority-Cum-Regional Manager and Others v. Nikunja Bihari Patnaik (1996) 9 SCC 69 
16	
Mihir Kumar Hazara Choudhury v. Life Insurance Corporation and Another (2017) 9 SCC 404; Chairman 
and Managing Director, United Commercial Bank and Others v. P.C. Kakkar (2003) 4 SCC 364.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
259
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
23.	 Now, we shall address Issue No. (i) i.e., whether, post-retirement, 
the punishment as imposed upon the appellant is permissible in law. 
24.	 In support of his contention on the issue, the learned counsel for 
the appellant had placed reliance on Regulation 2 of the Service 
Regulations which reads as under:
“2. OFFICERS TO WHOM THE REGULATIONS APPLY
2. (1) These Regulations shall apply to all officers of the 
Bank and to such other employees of the Bank to whom 
they may be made applicable by the Competent Authority 
to the extent and subject to such conditions as such 
authority may decide.
(2) They shall also apply to officers transferred/ posted/
deputed outside India except to such extent as may be 
specifically or generally prescribed by the Competent 
Authority.
(3) They shall, however, not apply to employees appointed/
engaged in any country outside India and permanently 
serving there.”
25.	 On the other hand, the learned counsel for the Bank relied on 
Regulation 20 (3), more particularly Clause (iii) of Sub-regulation (3) 
of Regulation 20, of the Service Regulations. Sub-regulation (3) of 
Regulation 20 reads as under:
“20. TERMINATION OF SERVICE
(3) (i) An officer against whom disciplinary proceedings 
are pending shall not leave/discontinue or resign from his 
service in the bank without the prior approval in writing 
of Competent Authority and any notice or resignation 
given by such an officer before or during the disciplinary 
proceedings shall not take effect unless it is accepted by 
the Competent Authority.
(ii) Disciplinary proceedings shall be deemed to be pending 
against any employee for the purpose of this regulation 
if he has been placed under suspension or any notice 
has been issued to him to show cause why disciplinary 
proceedings shall not be instituted against him and will 
be deemed to be pending until final orders are passed by 
the Competent Authority.

260
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(iii) The officers against whom disciplinary proceedings 
have been initiated will cease to be in service on the date 
of superannuation, but the disciplinary proceedings will 
continue as if he was in service until the proceedings are 
concluded and final order is passed in respect thereof. 
The concerned officer will not receive any pay and/or 
allowance after the date of superannuation. He will also 
not be entitled for the payments of retirement benefits till 
the proceedings are completed and final order is passed 
thereon except his own contribution to CPF.”
26.	 The contention on behalf of the appellant is that the Service 
Regulations, of which Regulation 20 (3) (iii) is a part, would apply 
to all officers of the Bank. However, once an officer superannuates, 
he is no longer an officer of the Bank therefore, Regulation 20 (3) 
(iii) cannot rescue disciplinary proceedings post-retirement. Thus, it 
is contended, post-retirement, action can be taken only under the 
Pension Regulations.
27.	 At this stage, it would be useful to refer to two decisions placed 
on behalf of the appellant, namely, “UCO Bank and Others vs. 
Prabhakar Sadashiv Karvade” (supra) (for short, Prabhakar 
Sadashiv Karvade) and “Ramesh Chandra Sharma vs. Punjab 
National Bank and Another” (supra) (for short, Ramesh Chander 
Sharma).
28.	 In Prabhakar Sadashiv Karvade, based on a charge sheet served 
on 09.09.2000, the incumbent was dismissed from service on 
12.10.2004 while he had retired from service on 13.12.1993. In that 
context, this Court considered various service Rules/ Regulations 
which were extracted in Paragraph 8 of the judgment. Relevant 
portion of which is reproduced below:
“8. …..
Discipline and Appeal Regulations
4. Penalties—The following are the penalties which may 
be imposed on an officer employee, for acts of misconduct 
or for any other good and sufficient reasons—
Minor penalties —
(a) censure;

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
261
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
(b) withholding of increments of pay with or without 
cumulative effect;
(c) withholding of promotion;
(d) recovery from pay or such other amount as may be due 
to him of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused 
to the Bank by negligence or breach of orders.
(e) reduction to a lower stage in the timescale of pay for 
a period not exceeding 3 years, without cumulative effect 
and not adversely affecting the officer’s pension.
Major penalties —
(f) save as provided for in (e) above, reduction to a lower 
stage in the timescale of pay for a specified period, with 
further directions as to whether or not the officer will earn 
increments of pay during the period of such reduction and 
whether on the expiry of such period the reduction will or 
will not have the effect of postponing the future increments 
of his pay.
(g) reduction to a lower grade or post,
(h) compulsory retirement;
(i) removal from service which shall not be a disqualification 
for future employment;
(j) dismissal which shall ordinarily be a disqualification for 
future employment.”
“1979 Regulations
20 (3) (iii) The officer against whom disciplinary proceedings 
have been initiated will cease to be in service on the date 
of superannuation but the disciplinary proceedings will 
continue as if he was in service until the proceedings are 
concluded and final order is passed in respect thereof. 
The concerned officer will not receive any pay and/or 
allowance after the date of superannuation. He will also 
not be entitled for the payment of retirement benefits till 
the proceedings are completed and final order is passed 
thereon except his own contributions to CPF.”

262
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“The Pension Regulations
46. Provisional Pension —(1) An employee who has 
retired on attaining the age of superannuation or otherwise 
and against whom any departmental or judicial proceedings 
are instituted or departmental proceedings are continued, a 
provisional pension, equal to the maximum pension which 
would have been admissible to him, would be allowed 
subject to adjustment against final retirement benefits 
sanctioned to him, upon conclusion of the proceedings 
but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally 
sanctioned is less than the provisional pension or the 
pension is reduced or withheld, etc. either permanently 
or for a specified period.
(2) In such cases the gratuity shall not be paid to such an 
employee until the conclusion of the proceedings against 
him. The gratuity shall be paid to him on conclusion of the 
proceedings subject to the decision of the proceedings. 
Any recoveries to be made from an employee shall be 
adjusted against the amount of gratuity payable.
Explanation. — in this Chapter—(a) to (e)
***
48. Recovery of pecuniary loss caused to the Bank—
(1) The competent authority may withhold or withdraw a 
pension or a part thereof, whether permanently or for a 
specified period, and order recovery from pension of the 
whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the bank if in 
any departmental or judicial proceedings the pensioner is 
found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence or criminal 
breach of trust or forgery or acts done fraudulently during 
the period of his service;
Provided that the Board shall be consulted before any 
final orders are passed.
Provided further that departmental proceedings, if instituted 
while the employee was in service, shall, after the retirement 
of the employee, be deemed to be proceedings under 
these Regulations and shall be continued and concluded 
by the authority by which they were commenced in the 
same manner as if the employee had continued in service.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
263
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
Provided also that no departmental or judicial proceedings, 
if not initiated while the employee was in service, shall be 
instituted in respect of a cause of action which arose or 
in respect of an event which took place more than four 
years before such institution.
(2) Where the competent authority orders recovery of 
pecuniary loss from the pension, the recovery shall 
ordinarily be made at a rate exceeding one-third of the 
pension admissible on the date of retirement of the 
employee.
Provided that where a part of pension is withheld or 
withdrawn, the amount of pension drawn by a pensioner 
shall not be less than the minimum pension payable under 
these Regulations.”
After considering the aforesaid Regulations, this Court held as under:
“9. A reading of the plain language of Regulation 4 of the 
Discipline and Appeal Regulations and Regulation 20(3)
(iii) of the 1979 Regulations makes it clear that any of 
the penalties, whether major or minor can be imposed 
only on a serving officer employee of the Bank. This 
necessarily implies that none of the penalties specified in 
Regulation 4 of the Discipline and Appeal Regulations can 
be imposed on an officer employee after his retirement 
from service, though in terms of Regulation 20(3)(iii) of 
the 1979 Regulations, the disciplinary proceedings initiated 
against an officer employee before his retirement can be 
continued and final order is passed and further that such 
officer employee is not entitled to retiral benefits till the 
conclusion of disciplinary proceedings and passing of 
final order. The only exception to this is that the officer is 
entitled to receive his own contribution to CPF. However, 
there is nothing in the language of these Regulations 
from which it can be inferred that the disciplinary authority 
has the power to impose a substantive punishment on 
retired officer employee. This becomes more explicit 
from a conjoint reading of Regulation 48 of the Pension 
Regulations which empowers the competent authority 
to withhold or withdraw a pension or a part thereof and 

264
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
order recovery from pension of the whole or part of any 
pecuniary loss caused to the bank if in a departmental or 
judicial proceedings, the pensioner is found guilty of grave 
misconduct or negligence or criminal breach of trust or 
forgery or acts done fraudulently during the period of his 
service. Second proviso to Regulation 48 contains a fiction 
and lays down that if the departmental proceedings are 
instituted while the employee was in service, the same 
shall be deemed to be proceedings under the Regulations 
and continued and concluded as if the employee had 
continued in service. The third proviso imposes a bar on 
the initiation of departmental or judicial proceedings against 
an employee after his retirement in respect of an event 
which took place more than 4 years before such institution. 
The sum and substance of these Regulations is that even 
though a departmental inquiry instituted against an officer 
employee before his retirement can continue even after his 
retirement, none of the substantive penalties specified in 
Regulation 4 of 1979 Regulations, which include dismissal 
from service, can be imposed on an officer employee after 
his retirement on attaining the age of superannuation. 
Therefore, we have no hesitation to hold that order dated 
12-10-2004 passed by the disciplinary authority dismissing 
the respondent from service, who had superannuated on 
31-12-1993 was ex facie illegal and without jurisdiction 
and the High Court did not commit any error by setting 
aside the same.
10. We may also observe that master and servant 
relationship between the respondent and the employer 
i.e. Appellant 1 Bank had come to an end for all practical 
purposes on 31-12-1993 i.e. the date of superannuation. 
The departmental inquiry initiated against the respondent 
before his retirement could be continued for a limited 
purpose for determining whether or not he is entitled for 
full pensionary benefits and gratuity.”
(Emphasis supplied)
29.	 In Ramesh Chandra Sharma (supra), the issue was whether 
punishment of dismissal could be inflicted on an employee who has 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
265
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
already retired on attaining the age of superannuation. In that context, 
this Court considered Regulation 20(3)(iii) of the Service Regulations 
(which is in same terms as Regulation 20(3) (iii) of 1979 Regulations 
extracted in the preceding paragraph) and Regulations 22, 43 and 
48 of the Pension Regulations, which are reproduced below:
“22. (i) Resignation or dismissal or removal or termination 
of an employee from the services of the Bank shall entail 
forfeiture of his entire past service and consequently shall 
not qualify for pensionary benefits.
43. Withholding or withdrawal of pension.—The competent 
authority may, by order in writing, withhold or withdraw a 
pension or a part thereof, whether permanently or for a 
specified period, if the pensioner is convicted of a serious 
crime or criminal breach of trust or forgery of (sic or) acting 
fraudulently or is found guilty of grave misconduct.
Provided that where a part of pension is withheld or 
withdrawn, the amount of such pension shall not be reduced 
below the minimum pension per mensem payable under 
these Regulations.
48. Recovery of pecuniary loss caused to the Bank.—(1) 
The competent authority may withhold or withdraw a 
pension or a part thereof, whether permanently or for a 
specified period and order recovery from pension of the 
whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Bank if in 
any departmental or judicial proceedings the pensioner is 
found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence or criminal 
breach of trust or forgery or acts done fraudulently during 
the period of his service:
Provided that the Board shall be consulted before any 
final orders are passed;
Provided further that departmental proceedings, if instituted 
while the employee was in service, shall, after the retirement 
of the employee, be deemed to be proceedings under 
these Regulations and shall be continued and concluded 
by the authority by which they were commenced in the 
same manner as if the employee had continued in service;

266
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(2) No departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the 
employee was in service, shall be instituted in respect of 
an event which took place more than four years before 
such institution:
Provided that the disciplinary proceedings so instituted 
shall be in accordance with the procedure applicable to 
disciplinary proceedings in relation to the employee during 
the period of his service.
(3) Where the competent authority orders recovery of 
pecuniary loss from the pension, the recovery shall 
not ordinarily be made at a rate exceeding one-third of 
the pension admissible on the date of retirement of the 
employee:
Provided that where a part of pension is withheld or 
withdrawn, the amount of pension drawn by a pensioner 
shall not be less than the minimum pension payable under 
these Regulations.”
Construing the object of Regulation 20(3)(iii) (supra), this Court 
observed:
“17. ……
The said Regulation clearly envisages continuation of a 
disciplinary proceeding despite the officer ceasing to be 
in service on the date of superannuation. For the said 
purpose a legal fiction has been created providing that the 
delinquent officer would be deemed to be in service until 
the proceedings are concluded and final order is passed 
thereon. The said Regulation being statutory in nature 
should be given full effect.”
Thereafter, upon considering Regulations 22, 43 and 48 of the 
Pension Regulations, it was held:
“25. Indisputably as a consequence of the order imposing 
the punishment of dismissal from service the appellant 
would not have qualified for the pensionary benefits.
……………

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
267
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
26. Where a proceeding is initiated for withholding or 
withdrawal of pension, Regulation 43 of the Pension 
Regulations would be attracted. But provisions of the said 
Regulation if read in its entirety clearly go to show that an 
officer would not qualify for pensionary benefits, if, inter 
alia, he is dismissed from service.
27. Regulation 48 empowers the Bank to recover pecuniary 
loss caused to it from the pensionary benefits. Regulation 
20(3)(iii) of the (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations must be 
read in conjunction with the Pension Regulations. Where 
the employees are pension optees, Regulation 48(1) shall 
apply. In any event, if an officer is removed or dismissed 
from service under Regulation 4 of the (Discipline and 
Appeal) Regulations, the Bank need not take recourse to 
Regulation 48 of the Pension Regulations as Regulation 
22 thereof would be attracted.”
30.	 In Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Mahanadi Coalfields 
Ltd.  vs. Rabindranath Choubey (supra) (for short, Mahanadi 
Coalfields Ltd.), the issue, inter alia, under consideration was, 
‘whether, in view of Rule 34.2 of the 1978 Rules, the punishment 
of dismissal can be imposed upon finding one guilty of misconduct, 
where departmental enquiry is instituted while the employee is in 
service and continued after he attains the age of superannuation?’ 
31.	 Rule 34.2 and 34.3 of CDA Rules, which were considered by this 
Court in Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., read as under:
“34.2. Disciplinary proceeding, if instituted while the 
employee was in service whether before his retirement or 
during his re-employment shall, after the final retirement 
of the employee, be deemed to be proceeding and shall 
be continued and concluded by the authority by which it 
was commenced in the same manner as if the employee 
had continued in service.
34.3. During the pendency of the disciplinary proceedings, 
the Disciplinary Authority may withhold payment of gratuity, 
for ordering the recovery from gratuity of the whole or part 
of any pecuniary loss caused to the Company if have 
been guilty of offences /misconduct as mentioned in sub-

268
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
section (6) of Section 4 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 
1972 or to have caused pecuniary loss to the Company 
by misconduct or negligence, during his service including 
service rendered on deputation or on re-employment after 
retirement. However, the provisions of Sections 7(3) and 
7(3-A) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 should be 
kept in view in the event of delayed payment, in the case 
the employee is fully exonerated.”
32.	 In that context, in Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., this Court held:
“7. Indisputably, the respondent was governed by the 
CDA Rules. Therefore, Rules 34.2 and 34.3 of the CDA 
Rules shall be applicable and the respondent employee 
shall be governed by the said provisions. Rule 34 
permits the management to withhold the gratuity during 
the pendency of the disciplinary proceedings. Rule 34.2 
permits the disciplinary proceedings to be continued and 
concluded even after the employee has attained the age 
of superannuation, provided the disciplinary proceedings 
are instituted while the employee was in service. It also 
further provides that such disciplinary proceedings shall be 
deemed to be the proceedings and shall be continued and 
concluded by the authority by which it was commenced 
in the same manner as if the employee had continued 
in service. Therefore, as such, on a fair reading of Rule 
34.2 of the CDA Rules, an employee shall be deemed 
to be continued in service, after he attains the age of 
superannuation/retired, for the limited purpose of continuing 
and concluding the disciplinary proceedings which were 
instituted while the employee was in service. Therefore, at 
the conclusion of such disciplinary proceedings any of the 
penalty provided under Rule 27 of the CDA Rules can be 
imposed by the authority including the order of dismissal. 
If the submission on behalf of the employee that after the 
employee has attained the age of superannuation and/or 
he has retired from service, despite Rule 34.2, no order 
of penalty of dismissal can be passed is accepted, in 
that case, it will be frustrating permitting the authority to 
continue and conclude the disciplinary proceedings after 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
269
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
retirement. If the order of dismissal cannot be passed after 
the employee has retired and/or has attained the age of 
superannuation in the disciplinary proceedings which were 
instituted while the employee was in service, in that case, 
there shall not be any fruitful purpose to continue and 
conclude the disciplinary proceedings in the same manner 
as if the employee had continued in service.
8. It is true that while considering the very provisions of 
the CDA Rules, namely, Rule 34.2 and Rule 34.3 of the 
CDA Rules, this Court in Jaswant Singh Gill [Jaswant 
Singh Gill v. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd., (2007) 1 SCC 663 : 
(2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 584] has observed and held that once 
the employee is permitted to retire on attaining the age of 
superannuation, thereafter no order of dismissal can be 
passed. However, for the reasons stated hereinabove, we 
are not in agreement with the view taken by this Court in 
Jaswant Singh Gill [Jaswant Singh Gill v. Bharat Coking 
Coal Ltd., (2007) 1 SCC 663: (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 584]. As 
observed hereinabove, if no major penalty is permissible 
after retirement, even in a case where the disciplinary 
proceedings were instituted while the employee was in 
service, in that case, Rule 34.2 would become otiose and 
shall be meaningless.
9. On the contrary, there is a decision of three-Judge 
Bench of this Court in Ram Lal Bhaskar [SBI v. Ram Lal 
Bhaskar, (2011) 10 SCC 249: (2012) 1 SCC (L&S) 402] 
taking just a contrary view. In Ram Lal Bhaskar [SBI v. 
Ram Lal Bhaskar, (2011) 10 SCC 249: (2012) 1 SCC 
(L&S) 402], Rule 19(3) of the State Bank of India Officers 
Service Rules, 1992 came up for consideration which was 
pari materia with Rule 34.2 of the CDA Rules. The said 
Rule 19(3) of the State Bank of India Officers Service 
Rules, 1992 also permits the disciplinary proceedings 
to continue even after the retirement of an employee if 
those were instituted when the delinquent employee was 
in service. In that case, charge-sheet was served upon 
the respondent before his retirement. The proceedings 
continued after his retirement and were conducted in 
accordance with the relevant Rules where charges were 

270
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
proved. Punishment of dismissal was imposed. The High 
Court allowed [Ramlal Bhaskar v. SBI, Writ-A No. 8415 of 
2003, order dated 12-4-2006 (All)] the petition and quashed 
the order of dismissal. This Court reversed the said decision 
of the High Court. In the said decision, it was specifically 
observed by this Court while considering the pari materia 
provisions that in case disciplinary proceedings under the 
relevant Rules of service have been initiated against an 
officer before he ceased to be in the bank’s service by 
the operation of, or by virtue of, any of the Rules or the 
provisions of the Rules, the disciplinary proceedings may, 
at the discretion of the Managing Director, be continued 
and concluded by the authority by whom the proceedings 
were initiated in the manner provided for in the Rules as 
if the officer continues to be in service, so however, that 
he shall be deemed to be in service only for the purpose 
of the continuance and conclusion of such proceedings. 
In the said decision, this Court also took note of another 
decision of this Court in Rajinder Lal Capoor [UCO Bank v. 
Rajinder Lal Capoor, (2007) 6 SCC 694 : (2007) 2 SCC 
(L&S) 550] and it is observed even in the said decision that 
the UCO Bank Officer Employees’ Service Regulations, 
1979 which were also pari materia to the SBI Rules as 
well as the CDA Rules, could be invoked only when the 
disciplinary proceedings had been initiated prior to the 
delinquent officer ceased to be in service.”
33.	 What is important to note is that in Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., this 
Court had the occasion to consider its earlier decision in Ramesh 
Chandra Sharma, and the same was approved. 
34.	 The ratio of Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. is found in paragraphs 47 
and 48 of the judgment, which are reproduced below:
“47. Thus considering the provisions of Rules 34.2 and 34.3 
of the CDA Rules, the inquiry can be continued given the 
deeming fiction in the same manner as if the employee had 
continued in service and appropriate punishment, including 
that of dismissal can be imposed apart from the forfeiture 
of the gratuity wholly or partially including the recovery of 
the pecuniary loss as the case may be.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
271
Virinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank & Ors.
48. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above 
and in view of the decision of the three-Judge Bench of 
this Court in Ram Lal Bhaskar [SBI v. Ram Lal Bhaskar, 
(2011) 10 SCC 249 : (2012) 1 SCC (L&S) 402] and our 
conclusions as above, it is observed and held that (1) the 
appellant employer has a right to withhold the gratuity 
during the pendency of the disciplinary proceedings, and 
(2) the disciplinary authority has powers to impose the 
penalty of dismissal/major penalty upon the respondent 
even after his attaining the age of superannuation, as the 
disciplinary proceedings were initiated while the employee 
was in service.”
35.	 In Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd., Ajay Rastogi, J. wrote a separate 
opinion partly concurring and partly dissenting with the majority 
view. In respect of the first question, Ajay Rastogi, J. concurred 
with the majority view whereas in respect of the second question, 
that is, whether the penalty of dismissal could be imposed after the 
employee had retired from service, Ajay Rastogi, J. opined thus:
“78.2. Que. 2—Whether the penalty of dismissal could be 
imposed after the employee stood retired from service?
Ans. In my considered view, after conclusion of the 
disciplinary inquiry, if held guilty, indeed a penalty can be 
inflicted upon an employee/delinquent who stood retired 
from service and what should be the nature of penalty will 
always depend on the relevant scheme of the Rules and 
on the facts and circumstances of each case, but either 
of the substantive penalties specified under Rule 27 of the 
1978 Rules including dismissal from service are not open 
to be inflicted on conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings 
and the punishment of forfeiture of gratuity commensurate 
with the nature of guilt may be inflicted upon a delinquent 
employee provided under Rule 34.3 of the 1978 Rules 
read with sub-section (6) of Section 4 of the 1972 Act.”
36.	 On a survey of the decisions cited and discussed above, in our view, 
what is settled is that if the extant service Rules/Regulations permit 
continuance of the disciplinary proceedings, initiated against an officer/ 
employee before he had attained the age of superannuation, those 

272
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
can be continued and brought to its logical conclusion even after 
he had attained the age of superannuation. And where, pursuant 
to such proceedings, the ultimate penalty imposed is of dismissal, 
there may be no technical difficulty in its implementation as it may 
result in forfeiture of pension and other retiral dues. Therefore, in 
such an event, the question of entitlement to pensionary benefits 
may not arise. However, where the punishment imposed is such 
which may, instead of forfeiture of pension in its entirety, result in 
mere reduction or adjustment of pension, or recovery from post retiral 
dues, the Court may have to consider whether such punishment is 
implementable or not, post- retirement.
37.	 In the instant case, the punishment awarded is of reducing the pay 
scale by three stages on permanent basis. Such reduction in the pay 
scale would relate back to the date the incumbent superannuated from 
service. Ordinarily, pension is computed based on salary last drawn/
payable. Therefore, in our view, it would not be difficult to implement 
such a punishment as pension can be computed accordingly.
38.	 For the foregoing reasons, in our view, the Division Bench of the High 
Court was justified in allowing the writ appeal by properly construing 
Regulation 20(3)(iii) of the Service Regulations.
39.	 The appeal therefore lacks merit and is accordingly dismissed. 
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. There shall be 
no order as to costs.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
