[2026] 4 S.C.R. 140 : 2026 INSC 243
Ramadebi Rautray 
v. 
State of Odisha & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 3270 of 2026)
10 March 2026
[Vikram Nath and Sandeep Mehta,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order passed by 
the High Court upholding the declaration that the election of the 
respondent to the post of Chairman Delang Panchayat Samiti 
was invalid, however, setting aside the declaration made in favour 
of the appellant directing her appointment as the Chairman, and 
directing fresh election for the said post.
Headnotes†
Orissa Panchayat Samiti Act, 1959 – ss.45(1)(v), 44-E, 44-J – 
Disqualification on becoming a member and continuing as a 
member – Election to the post of Chairman Delang Panchayat 
Samiti – Appellant and the respondent, both members of 
Panchayat Samitis contested the election and respondent 
declared elected – Appellant challenged the election of the 
respondent as the Panchayat Samiti Member and Chairman 
u/s.45(1)(v) on the ground that she was disqualified from 
contesting the said election, as she had given birth to a third 
child after the cut-off date – Tribunal allowed the election 
petition declaring the election of the respondent-returned 
candidate to both the post as void, and declared the appellant 
to be the Chairman being the candidate who secured next 
highest number of votes  – Respondent filed an appeal – 
Appellate tribunal upheld the declaration that the election of 
the respondent was invalid, however, the declaration made 
in favour of the appellant directing her appointment as the 
Chairman set aside, and directed fresh election for the said 
post – High Court upheld the judgment of the appellate 
tribunal – Challenge to:
Held: Decision of the tribunal, as affirmed by the appellate tribunal 
and the High Court, disqualifying the respondent-returned candidate, 
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
141
Ramadebi Rautray v. State of Odisha & Ors.
does not require any interference whatsoever, because from the 
material available on record, it is clear that the respondent failed to 
cross-examine the appellant-election petitioner and her witnesses, 
despite ample opportunities having been granted to her – Appellant 
having led clinching evidence remained uncontroverted of facts 
necessary to prove the disqualification – With the disqualification of 
the respondent having been affirmed, no other contestant except the 
appellant remained in fray for the post of Chairman of the Delang 
Panchayat Samiti, as only the respondent and the appellant had 
contested the said election – Elections were held way back in the 
year 2022, process of adjudication of the election petition, the appeal 
and the writ petition consumed more than 3 years – If at this stage, 
the appellant is deprived of the fruits of her successful challenge 
to the election of the respondent, by asking her to contest a fresh 
election, that would amount to a travesty of justice – Thus, the 
declaration made by the tribunal, to the effect that the appellant 
was duly elected as the Chairman and directing her appointment 
to the said post is just, legal and equitable – Appellate tribunal 
erred in reversing the said declaration on the premise that other 
members of the Delang Panchayat Samiti should be given an 
opportunity to contest for the post of Chairman – High Court too, 
erred in affirming the same to that extent – For election to the post 
of Chairman of the Delang Panchayat Samiti, only the appellant 
and the respondent had contested and hence setting aside of the 
declaration issued by the tribunal in favour of the appellant, wholly 
unwarranted and uncalled for – Impugned judgment passed by the 
appellate tribunal, and by the High Court, to the extent that the 
appellant has been deprived of the consequential declaratory relief 
of being elected as the Chairman, set aside – Direction given by 
the tribunal declaring the appellant elected to the post of Chairman 
of the Delang Panchayat Samiti restored. [Paras 19, 20, 23-28]
List of Acts
Orissa Panchayat Samiti Act, 1959.
List of Keywords
Election; Fresh election for the post; Disqualification on becoming 
a member and continuing as a member; Election to the post 
of Chairman Delang Panchayat Samiti; Election to the post of 
Panchayat Samiti Member; Disqualification from contesting the 
election; Birth of a third child after the cut-off date.

142
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No.  
3270 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.12.2025 of the High Court 
of Orissa at Cuttack in WPC No. 5196 of 2025
With
Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 3528 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Kedar Nath Tripathy, Aditya Narayan Tripathy, Umakant Misra, 
Tushar Garg, Ms. Prabhati Nayak, Debabrata Dash.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Mehta, J.
Civil Appeal @ SLP(Civil) No. 4129 of 2026
1.	
Heard. Leave granted.
2.	
The instant appeal by special leave arises from the common 
judgment and order dated 15th December, 2025 passed by the High 
Court of Orissa at Cuttack1 in W.P. (C) No. 5565 of 2025 filed by 
the appellant, Ramadebi Rautray2, and W.P.(C) No. 5196 of 2025, 
filed by the respondent, Basanti Sahoo3, whereby the High Court 
dismissed both the writ petitions and upheld the order of the Court 
of the learned 1st Additional District Judge, Puri4, disqualifying the 
respondent-returned candidate from the post of Panchayat Samiti 
Member, Harirajpur Gram Panchayat as well as of Chairman of the 
Delang Panchayat Samiti and directing re-election for the said post.
1	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “High Court”.
2	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “appellant-election petitioner”.
3	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “respondent-returned candidate”.
4	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “Election Appellate Tribunal”.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
143
Ramadebi Rautray v. State of Odisha & Ors.
I.	
BRIEF FACTS
3.	
Briefly stated, facts relevant and essential for the disposal of the 
appeal are as below.
4.	
The appellant-election petitioner and the respondent-returned 
candidate contested the elections for the post of Panchayat Samiti 
Member, Delang Kothabad Gram Panchayat, and Harirajpur Gram 
Panchayat, respectively, in the year 2022. Both were duly elected 
as members from their respective constituencies. 
5.	
Pursuant to being elected as members of Panchayat Samitis, both the 
appellant-election petitioner and the respondent-returned candidate 
contested the election for the post of Chairman of the Delang 
Panchayat Samiti. It is important to note here that the appellant-
election petitioner and the respondent-returned candidate were the 
only two contestants for the post of Chairman. The respondent-
returned candidate was declared elected, whereas the appellant-
election petitioner lost the election for the post of Chairman. 
6.	
The appellant-election petitioner instituted Election Misc. Case 
No. 01 of 2022 before the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division), 
Pipili5 challenging the election of respondent-returned candidate 
as the Panchayat Samiti Member, Harirajpur Gram Panchayat and 
Chairman of the Delang Panchayat Samiti, on the ground that she 
was disqualified from contesting the said election, as she had given 
birth to a third child after the cut-off date and hence, she was barred 
from contesting the election to the post of Panchayat Samiti Member, 
Harirajpur Gram Panchayat in view of the embargo contained in 
Section 45(1)(v) of the Orissa Panchayat Samiti Act, 19596.
7.	
In the proceedings before the Election Tribunal, the appellant-election 
petitioner examined herself as PW-1, and two more witnesses were 
examined in support of her case. Ten documents were produced and 
exhibited in order to substantiate the plea that the respondent-returned 
candidate stood disqualified on the ground of having a third child 
born to her after the cut-off date. The respondent-returned candidate, 
despite being afforded ample opportunities, neither cross-examined 
the appellant-election petitioner and her witnesses, nor did she lead 
5	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “Election Tribunal”.
6	
Hereinafter, referred to as the “1959 Act”.

144
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
any evidence in her own defense. Consequently, the evidence of the 
appellant-election petitioner remained uncontroverted.
8.	
The election petition was allowed by the Election Tribunal, declaring 
the election of the respondent-returned candidate as Panchayat 
Samiti Member, Harirajpur Gram Panchayat to be invalid and as a 
consequence, her election to the post of Chairman of the Delang 
Panchayat Samiti was also declared to be void.
9.	
The Election Tribunal also passed a consequential order in favour of 
the appellant-election petitioner and declared her to be the Chairman 
of the Delang Panchayat Samiti, being the candidate who secured next 
highest number of votes. The competent authority was accordingly 
directed to fill up the post of the Chairman of the Delang Panchayat 
Samiti by appointing the appellant-election petitioner to the said post.
10.	 Being aggrieved, the respondent-returned candidate preferred 
Election Appeal No.10/3 of 2024 before the Election Appellate 
Tribunal. The said appeal was disposed of by upholding the declaration 
of the Election Tribunal that the election of the respondent-returned 
candidate as Panchayat Samiti Member of the Harirajpur Gram 
Panchayat was invalid. However, the consequential declaration made 
in favour of the appellant-election petitioner directing her appointment 
as the Chairman of the Delang Panchayat Samiti, was set aside. 
The Election Appellate Tribunal accordingly directed fresh election 
for the said post.
11.	 Aggrieved by the decision of the Election Appellate Tribunal, both the 
appellant-election petitioner and the respondent-returned candidate 
filed writ petitions7 before the High Court. The appellant-election 
petitioner challenged the direction for fresh election to the post of 
Chairman of the Delang Panchayat Samiti, whereas the respondent-
returned candidate assailed the finding whereby she had been 
disqualified from holding the office of Panchayat Samiti Member, 
Harirajpur Gram Panchayat and that of Chairman of the Delang 
Panchayat Samiti. The High Court, by the impugned judgment, 
dismissed both the writ petitions and upheld the judgment of the 
Election Appellate Tribunal. Aggrieved thereby, both the appellant 
and the respondent are before this Court by way of separate special 
leave petitions.
7	
W.P. (C) No. 5565 of 2025 (filed by appellant-election petitioner); W.P.(C) No. 5196 of 2025 (filed by 
respondent-returned candidate).

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
145
Ramadebi Rautray v. State of Odisha & Ors.
II.	
SUBMISSIONS ADVANCED
12.	 Shri Umakant Misra, learned counsel representing the appellant-
election petitioner, urged that the plea taken by the respondent-
returned candidate that she was not granted an opportunity to 
defend herself is wholly unfounded. He referred to the findings 
recorded in paragraph 12 of the High Court judgment, wherein 
reference has been made to the proceeding sheets of the Election 
Tribunal, and submitted that ample opportunities had been provided 
to the respondent-returned candidate to contest the case and to 
cross-examine the witnesses. However, she did not avail of such 
opportunities and her endeavour was aimed at delaying the disposal 
of the election petition. 
13.	 He further submitted that the evidence of the appellant-election 
petitioner, examined as PW-1, was not completed on a single day 
but was deferred on several dates at the request of the respondent-
returned candidate. However, when cross-examination was not 
conducted and the proceedings were sought to be lingered on, the 
cross-examination was closed by the Election Tribunal. The order 
closing cross-examination of the witnesses was never challenged 
thereafter and has thus attained finality. Similar was the situation for 
the other witnesses examined by the appellant-election petitioner. 
Thus, the case set up by the appellant-election petitioner seeking 
disqualification of the respondent-returned candidate on the ground 
of having a third child born to her after the cut-off date remained 
uncontroverted leading to the inevitable consequence of voiding of 
respondent-returned candidate election as Panchayat Samiti Member, 
Harirajpur Gram Panchayat and consequently as Chairman of the 
Delang Panchayat Samiti. 
14.	 Shri Misra further submitted that the Election Appellate Tribunal as well 
as the High Court fell into grave error in denying the consequential 
relief of appointment to the post of Chairman to the appellant-election 
petitioner. He urged that Section 45(1)(v) of the 1959 Act, which 
provides for disqualification on the ground of having more than two 
children, once attracted, renders the returned candidate statutorily 
disqualified from holding the office. It was urged that where a returned 
candidate suffers from such a statutory disqualification, the election 
petitioner is entitled as of right to seek setting aside of the election 

146
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the disqualified candidate along with consequential reliefs flowing 
therefrom. He further urged that the provisions of the 1959 Act, more 
particularly, Sections 44-E and 44-J aim to provide an effective and 
meaningful remedy in election disputes so as to avoid unnecessary 
elections where the outcome is effectively determinable on the basis 
of the votes already polled. In the present case, only the appellant-
election petitioner and the respondent-returned candidate contested 
the election for the post of Chairman. He thus contended that once 
the election of the respondent-returned candidate was set aside, 
the only permissible and natural consequence was to declare the 
appellant-election petitioner elected to the post of Chairman, as she 
had secured the next highest number of valid votes.
15.	 Per contra, Shri Kedar Nath Tripathy, learned counsel appearing 
for the respondent-returned candidate, vehemently and fervently 
contended that: (i) the Election Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to 
try the election petition filed by the appellant-election petitioner; and 
(ii) the respondent-returned candidate was not afforded adequate 
opportunity to contest the election petition and to adduce evidence 
in her defense.
16.	 He further submitted that, as a matter of fact, only one child was 
born to the respondent-returned candidate, whereas the other two 
children were born from her husband’s first marriage and thus, she 
was wrongly and unjustly declared disqualified from the posts.
III.	
ANALYSIS
17.	 We have heard and considered the submissions advanced by the 
learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the impugned 
orders. 
18.	 The issue of jurisdiction of the Election Tribunal was not seriously 
contested by the respondent-returned candidate on any valid legal 
ground and thus, the same does not merit consideration. 
19.	 So far as the decision of the Election Tribunal, as affirmed by the 
Election Appellate Tribunal and the High Court, disqualifying the 
respondent-returned candidate is concerned, the same does not 
require any interference whatsoever, because manifestly, from the 
material available on record, it is clear that the respondent-returned 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
147
Ramadebi Rautray v. State of Odisha & Ors.
candidate failed to cross-examine the appellant-election petitioner and 
her witnesses, despite ample opportunities having been granted to her.
20.	 It is apparent that, by avoiding cross-examination of the witnesses, 
the respondent-returned candidate was attempting to buy time and 
defer the inevitable consequence i.e., declaration of her election 
as Panchayat Samiti Member, Harirajpur Gram Panchayat, invalid 
on account of the disqualification contained in Section 45(1)(v) of 
the 1959 Act. The appellant-election petitioner having led clinching 
evidence (which remained uncontroverted) of facts necessary to 
prove such disqualification, the necessary consequence was the 
disqualification of the respondent-returned candidate. Hence, the 
three concurrent findings of the Election Tribunal, Election Appellate 
Tribunal, and the High Court on this aspect require no interference 
of this Court. 
21.	 Insofar as the claim of the appellant-election petitioner for the post of 
Chairman is concerned, reference may be gainfully made to Sections 
44-E and 44-J of the 1959 Act, which read as follows:
“Section 44-E. Relief that may be claimed by the 
petitioner. – 
A petitioner may, in addition to claiming a 
declaration that the election of all or any 
of the returned candidates is void, claim a 
further declaration that he himself or any 
other candidate, has been duly elected.
Section 44-J. Decision of Civil Judge (Senior Division). –
(1) If the Civil Judge (Senior Division), after 
making such enquiry, as he deems necessary, 
finds in respect of any person whose election is 
called in question by a petition that his election 
was valid, he shall dismiss the petition as 
against such person and may award costs at 
his discretion.
(2) If the Civil Judge (Senior Division) finds 
that the election of any person was invalid, it 
shall either-

148
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(a) declare that a casual vacancy to 
have been created; or
(b) declare another candidate to 
have been duly elected;
whichever course appears, in the circumstances 
of the case to be more appropriate and in either 
case, may award costs at his discretion.
(3) In the event of the Civil Judge (Senior 
Division) declaring a casual vacancy to have 
been created, it shall direct the Collector of the 
district or such other authority prescribed in this 
behalf to take proceedings for filling the vacancy.
(4) All orders of the Civil Judge (Senior Division) 
shall, subject to any order passed in an appeal, 
if any, be final and conclusive:”
(Emphasis supplied)
22.	 A plain reading of Sections 44-E and 44-J of the 1959 Act makes it 
amply clear that the former provision permits the election petitioner to 
claim relief not only for having the election of the returned candidate 
declared invalid, but also for declaring the election petitioner duly 
elected to the post. The latter provision, i.e., Section 44-J(2)(b), 
confers jurisdiction upon the Civil Judge/Election Tribunal to declare 
any other candidate as duly elected in cases where the election of 
the originally returned candidate is found to be invalid. 
23.	 Indisputably, in the present case, the appellant-election petitioner 
and the respondent-returned candidate were the only two contesting 
candidates for the post of Chairman of Delang Panchayat Samiti. 
With the disqualification of the respondent-returned candidate having 
been affirmed, no other contestant except the appellant-election 
petitioner remained in fray for the post of Chairman of the Delang 
Panchayat Samiti, as only the respondent-returned candidate and 
the appellant-election petitioner had contested the said election. 
24.	 It is noteworthy that the elections were held way back in the year 2022. 
The process of adjudication of the election petition, the appeal and 
the writ petition consumed more than 3 years. Thus, in our opinion, 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
149
Ramadebi Rautray v. State of Odisha & Ors.
if at this stage, the appellant-election petitioner is deprived of the 
fruits of her successful challenge to the election of the respondent-
returned candidate, by asking her to contest a fresh election, that 
would amount to a travesty of justice.
25.	 In this background, we are of the firm opinion that the declaration 
made by the Election Tribunal, to the effect that the appellant-election 
petitioner was duly elected as the Chairman of the Delang Panchayat 
Samiti and directing her appointment to the said post is just, legal 
and equitable. The Election Appellate Tribunal fell into clear error in 
reversing the said declaration on the premise that other members of 
the Delang Panchayat Samiti should be given an opportunity to contest 
for the post of Chairman. The High Court too, erred in affirming the 
judgment of the Election Appellate Tribunal to that extent. 
26.	 At the cost of repetition, it may be noted that, for election to the post 
of Chairman of the Delang Panchayat Samiti, only the appellant-
election petitioner and the respondent-returned candidate had 
contested and hence setting aside of the declaration issued by the 
Election Tribunal in favour of the appellant-election petitioner on the 
premise that an opportunity should be given to other members of the 
Delang Panchayat Samiti, was wholly unwarranted and uncalled for. 
IV.	
CONCLUSION
27.	 Consequently, the impugned judgment dated 3rd February, 2025 
passed by the Election Appellate Tribunal, and the judgment dated 
15th December, 2025 passed by the High Court, to the extent that the 
appellant-election petitioner has been deprived of the consequential 
declaratory relief of being elected as the Chairman of the Delang 
Panchayat Samiti, are hereby set aside. 
28.	 Resultantly, the direction issued by the Election Appellate Tribunal 
declaring a casual vacancy for the post of Chairman of the Delang 
Panchayat Samiti is also set aside. The direction given by the 
Election Tribunal declaring the appellant-election petitioner elected 
to the post of Chairman of the Delang Panchayat Samiti is restored. 
Consequential steps for compliance be taken within two weeks from 
today. 
29.	 The appeal is allowed accordingly. Cost made easy.
30.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of accordingly.

150
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(CIVIL) NO(S). 3528 OF 2026
31.	 In view of the findings recorded by us by allowing Civil Appeal @ 
SLP(Civil) No. 4129 of 2026, the special leave petition preferred by 
the petitioner herein fails and is hereby dismissed. Cost made easy.
32.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed. 
Special Leave Petition dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
