[2026] 4 S.C.R. 298 : 2026 INSC 315
Shankar 
v. 
State of Rajasthan
(Criminal Appeal No. 1735 of 2026)
02 April 2026
[Sanjay Karol* and Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the concurrent 
conviction of the appellant-accused for killing his wife by setting 
her on fire, ought to be upheld.
Headnotes†
Evidence Act, 1872 – s.32 – Dying declaration – When can 
be relied upon – Appellant beat up his wife, poured kerosene 
over her and killed her by setting her on fire – Concurrent 
conviction u/s.302, IPC relying upon on the dying declaration 
of the deceased stating that it was the appellant who had 
poured kerosene on her and set her on fire – Challenge to:
Held: Dying declarations are exceptions to the rule of hearsay and, 
if a Court finds them consistent, believable and free of tutoring, it 
can convict the person named therein – In the present case, the 
medical evidence is consistent with the dying declaration – Appeal 
dismissed – Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 – s.26 – Penal 
Code, 1860 – ss.302, 342. [Paras 9, 12]
Concurrent findings of conviction – Scope of interference, 
restricted:
Held: It would only be permissible for this Court to interfere if the 
Courts below had committed manifest errors in law, misdirected 
itself in appreciating evidence, or completely missed out crucial 
pieces of evidence that would have bearing on the overall outcome 
of the case. [Para 7, 13]
Crimes Against Women – Dowry, domestic violence, etc. – 
Long-drawn legislative efforts for eradication of however, not 
to much yield – Reasons therefor. [Paras 14-18]
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
299
Shankar v. State of Rajasthan
Case Law Cited
Manjunath v. State of Karnataka [2023] 14 SCR 727 : 2023 SCC 
OnLine SC 1421; Shayara Bano v. Union of India [2017] 9 SCR 
797 : (2017) 9 SCC 1; Joseph Shine v. Union of India [2018] 11 
SCR 765 : (2018) 2 SCC 189; Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. 
Babita Puniya [2020] 3 SCR 833 : (2020) 7 SCC 469; Vineeta 
Sharma v. Rakesh Sharma [2020] 10 SCR 135 : (2020) 9 SCC 1; 
Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar [2014] 8 SCR 128 : (2014) 8 SCC 
273; Hiral P. Harsora v. Kusum Narottamdas Harsora [2016] 9 SCR 
515 : (2016) 10 SCC 165; Shakti Vahini v. Union of India [2018] 3 
SCR 770 : (2018) 7 SCC 192; Shafin Jahan v. Asokan K.M [2018] 
4 SCR 955 : (2018) 16 SCC 368 – referred to.
List of Acts
Evidence Act, 1872; Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; Penal 
Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961; Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 
2005; Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, 
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.
List of Keywords
Dying declaration; Wife killed by setting her on fire; Kerosene 
poured; Concurrent findings of conviction; Concurrent conviction; 
Medical evidence consistent with dying declaration; Burning a wife; 
Dowry; Domestic violence.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1735 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.08.2019 of the High Court 
of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur in DBCRA No. 65 of 2015.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Kavita Vadia, Sr. Adv., Tabrez Ahmad, Syed Mehdi Imam, 
Varun Verma, Chavi Jain, S. U. Abbas.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Divynk Panwar, Ms. Pallavi Garg, Ms. Sanjana Sharma, Prajjwal 
Singh, Ms. Nidhi Jaswal.

300
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Sanjay Karol, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
Shankar, the appellant was accused of having beaten up, poured 
kerosene over his wife – Sugna Bai, and killed her by setting her 
on fire. The Trial Court, Sessions Judge, Bundi, in Sessions Case 
No.249/2012 in terms of judgment dated 10.12.2014 sentenced him 
to life imprisonment under Section 302 and rigorous imprisonment 
for one year under Section 342, Indian Penal Code 18601. Fines 
of Rs.1000/- each for both the offences was also imposed, and 
simple imprisonment for one month was indicated to be suffered 
by him in the event of default. Criminal Appeal No.65 of 2015 
was dismissed by the learned Division Bench by judgment dated 
20.08.2019. Shankar, now is before this Court, asking us to overturn 
his concurrent conviction.
3.	
The facts, leading up to the position as indicated above was that 
the deceased had married the appellant about a month prior to 
her death on 19.10.2012 and within approximately 20 days the 
relationship had taken a sour turn on account of alleged excessive 
consumption of alcohol and the former possessing a violent streak. 
The deceased had apparently gone to her parental home when 
the appellant demanded that she return home immediately and 
make fresh food for him. While she was complying with such a 
demand, the appellant beat her up and, while doing so was allegedly 
drunk. Although she managed to free herself and move away, the 
appellant allegedly poured kerosene and threw a lit matchstick on 
her. Resultantly, she screamed causing the neighbours and those 
nearby including the appellant, to come to her aid. This included 
pouring water and also using blanket to quell the flame. Parents of 
the deceased who had, by this time, reached the scene of incident 
called the ambulance and she was taken to MBSH Hospital, 
Rajasthan for treatment. 
1	
IPC

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
301
Shankar v. State of Rajasthan
4.	
The FIR was recorded as under:
“Statement Smt. Sugna Bai W/o Shankar D/o Bheru 
caste Bhil age 20 years R/O Near Power House, Dabi 
PS, Dabi District Bundi, presently Dhaneshwar PS, Dabi 
District Bundi (Rajasthan), under treatment, admitted in 
Burn Ward, Bed No.3, MBSH Hospital (Rajasthan), Date 
15-10-12, Time 5.20 pm, on request, stated in the form 
that I was living with my husband at the above mentioned 
address in a rented room in the house of Shri Gulab Chand 
S/o Gajanand Ji Kalal in village Dhaneshwar, my parental 
home is also in village Dhaneshwar. About a month before 
my relationship with my x-husband Ramesh S/o Nanda 
caste Bhil resident of Dabi broke down, with the consent 
of my parents, I had a love married with Shankar S/o 
Modhu caste Bhil resident of Dabi, presently Dhaneshwar. 
He kept me well for about 20 days, but for the last 10-
12 days, my husband Shankar used to beat me up after 
drinking alcohol every day and did not allow me to talk 
to anyone. Today, on 15-10-12, at about 12:30 PM, I had 
gone to my father’s house to meet my mother, where my 
husband Shankar came and said, come home and make 
rotis, I am hungry. As soon as I said that, I came from 
home to our rented room and came and started cutting 
ladyfinger to make vegetables. Then my husband Shankar 
came who was drunk. As soon as he came, he started 
beating me with kicks and punches and strangled me, 
from which I was freed with great difficulty. Then a plastic 
bottle kept in the room was filled with about half a bottle of 
kerosene oil. He locked the room from inside and poured 
kerosene on me and set me on fire with a matchstick 
and opened the latch from inside and ran away. When 
I shouted, he came back outside and threw a blanket 
on the fire on my body. At that very moment, the tenant 
living in the adjacent room, whose name and address I 
do not know, came running. My husband ran outside and 
the tenant woman poured water on me and after wetting 
the blanket, put it on me then my fire was extinguished. 
Later whoever heard about it came running. Somebody 
informed my parents and they also came running to my 
room and called 108 ambulance, which brought me for 

302
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
treatment and got me admitted to Bada Safakhana Kota, 
where I am undergoing treatment. Due to the burns, my 
whole body including face has blisters and the skin has 
torn. SD Ni. Thumb impression Sugna Bai Police Station 
Debi District Bundi Bumukam MBSH Burn ward Kota/
Date 15-10-12 Time 5.45 PM Action Police. It is certified 
that the above mentioned form statement of the victim 
Smt. Sugna Bai W/O Shankar D/O Bheru caste Bhil age 
20 years R/O present Dhaneshwar Jair admitted in Burn 
Ward Bed No. 3 MBSH Kota, should be written down word 
by word as per the statement given by the victim, please 
read it out loud and consider it to be correct. When the 
body of the victim was examined, the skin on forehead, 
left cheek, beard, hands and entire body was burnt due to 
fire. This has happened. They will be medically examined. 
Text of the form. 
From the search and inspection, the case falls under 
sections 323,307 IPC, hence, a case was registered at 
the return at police station. ASI was busy on the spot and 
investigation was commenced. 
Sd Inspector
Thumb Sugana Bai
Sd Gopal Lal
ASI PS-Dabi/Date 15.10.12
Time 10 PM. 
Police action Taken-
The above mentioned form statement of Smt. Sugana Bai 
W/o Shankar caste Bhil, age 20 years R/O near Power 
House, Dabi, presently Dhaneshwar PS Dabi ( Bundi), 
under treatment, admitted in MBS Hospital Burn Ward Bed 
No. 3, Kota was brought and presented by Gopal Lal ASI 
I/C police station. From the written form statement, the 
crime under section 323, 307 IPC is found to fall under 
the category, hence, case No. 220/12, Section above, was 
registered and investigation was started.” 
5.	
Upon completion of investigation, challan was presented for trial. 
To establish its case, the prosecution examined 15 witnesses and 
exhibited 23 documents. The accused did not lead any oral evidence 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
303
Shankar v. State of Rajasthan
and only furnished only one document in defence. In his statement 
under Section 313 Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732 he pled 
innocence and deliberate false implication. The findings of the Trial 
Court are tabulated as below:
Sl. 
No.
Point for consideration
Relevant 
paragraphs
Conclusion
1.
Whether the death of Smt. Sugna 
Bai was not natural but was 
caused as a result of the injuries 
caused by the burning of her 
body with fire substance before 
death.
9-13
Death of Sugna Bai 
was not natural and 
caused by injuries 
d u e t o i g n e o u s 
substance.
2.
3.
Did the accused Shankar 
voluntarily restrain his wife Smt. 
Sugna Bai Bhil (deceased) in 
a rented room in the house of 
Gulab Chand Kalal situated in 
Munja Dhaneshwar at about 
12-12.30 PM on 15.10.2012 and 
wrongfully confined her by locking 
the room from inside.
Whether the accused Shankar 
with the intent to commit culpable 
homicide of his wife Smt. Sugna 
Bai Bhil, on the said date, time 
and place, voluntarily brunt her 
by pouring kerosene oil on her 
body and setting her on fire with 
an igneous substance (match 
stick) and as a result of the 
injuries caused by the burning 
she died on 19.10.2012 at 7 .a.m. 
in Maharao Bhim Singh Hospital, 
Kota, while undergoing treatment. 
Under these circumstances the 
accused committed the murder 
of his wife Smt. Sugna Bai Bhil.
14-55
The prosecution has 
been successful in 
proving the offences 
against the appellant 
under Sections 342 
and 302 IPC beyond 
reasonable doubt.
4.
If yes then what will be the 
punishment?
57-64
Particulars already 
mentioned in para 1 
(supra)
2	
Cr.PC

304
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
6.	
On appeal, the High Court found the view taken by the Trial Court 
to be entirely justified, including the reliance placed on the dying 
declaration of the deceased. As such, the conviction and sentence 
of the appellant was confirmed. 
7.	
We have heard Ms. Kaveeta Wadia, learned senior counsel for 
the appellant and Mr. Divynk Panwar, learned counsel for the 
respondent-State. At the outset, it must be stated that the scope 
of interference in concurrent findings of conviction, is well- settled, 
as being fairly restricted. It would only be permissible for this Court 
to do so if the Courts below had committed manifest errors in law, 
misdirected itself in appreciating evidence, or completely missed 
out crucial pieces of evidence that would have bearing on the 
overall outcome of the case. The only aspect that remains to be 
seen is whether any of these criteria above, or any other ones of 
the recognised parameters, are met. 
8.	
The dying declaration which forms the basis of punishment awarded 
to the appellant, is not appended to the record placed before this 
Court. We record our surprise on that count, particularly given 
that it is the most essential document in a case of this nature. 
In these circumstances, we have no choice but to reproduce for 
reference, the relevant portion of the judgment of the Trial Court as 
follows:-
“Dying statement Exhibit P.20 has been recorded by 
PW. 12 Ajay Kumar Sharma, the then Additional Civil 
Judge (Special Court) No.4, Kota in the form of question 
and answer and before recording this statement, the 
clinical opinion has been taken on the back side of the 
paper of the same statement itself in which doctor has 
shown Sugna Bai to be competent to make the said 
statement. It is also mentioned on the same page that 
Sugna Bai has been identified by Gopal Lal Meena, ASI 
and the endorsement to this effect bears the signature 
of Gopal Lal Meena. The dying declaration Exhibit 
P.20 is based on only 05 questions and their short 
answers in the form of question and answer. Here the 
said questions and their answers are being written as  
follows:-

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
305
Shankar v. State of Rajasthan
Question.1 Who did this to you?
Answer – My husband poured kerosene on me and set 
me on fire. 
Question.2 When did you get burnt?
Answer – I was burnt in my rented room at 12 noon. 
Then my husband ran away. 
Question.3 What was it about which you were burnt?
Answer – my husband drinks alcohol and suspects me. 
If I look at anyone else, he fights. 
Question.4 Who came to save?
Answer – There is a tenant near our house, his wife 
saved him. I don’t know the name. 
Questions.5 Who lives in the room?
Answer – My husband and I live here.
On this dying declaration (Exhibit P.20) the thumb 
impression of Sugna Bai (deceased) is marked on. At 
the end of this declaration, the said Magistrate put his 
seal on it and has been signed.”
9.	
Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and Section 26 of 
its successor, Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 deal with dying 
declarations. Generally speaking, these declarations enjoy a special 
position given the timing and the nature thereof. This position rests 
on a philosophical understanding that when a person is about to meet 
his maker or in other words the oncoming of death and its finality is 
imminent, considerations which may force a person to speak other 
than the truth pale into insignificance and what does fall from them 
would, therefore, be only the truth. They are exceptions to the rule 
of hearsay and, if a Court finds them consistent, believable and 
free of tutoring, it can convict the person named therein. This Court 

306
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
has, in a number of judgments including one by one of us (Sanjay 
Karol, J.) in Manjunath v. State of Karnataka3, after considering 
the law on the issue culled out the applicable principles. 
10.	 In assailing his concurrent conviction, one of the grounds urged 
by the appellant was “…the magistrate while recording the dying 
declaration of the deceased has reported that the mental condition 
of the victim is not good and not in a position to give statement as 
she was admitted in hospital on 15.10.2012 and died on 19.10.2012. 
The Magistrate has taken her certification on some blank paper 
and he had made the endorsement on blank paper it is true that 
she could not sign on blank paper as she was not educated.” At 
the cost of brevity, the statement of the concerned officer namely 
Mr. Ajay Kumar Sharma, learned ACJM No.4-Kota at the relevant 
time, is reproduced as under : -
“Examination in Chief :-
On 15-10-2012, I was posted as Additional Chief Judicial 
Magistrate No.4, Kota. On that day, Gopal Lal ASI of Police 
Station Daabi presented a written requisition Exhibit P-19 
to the effect that a woman from our police station area 
is admitted in M.B.S. in a burnt condition and we want 
to record her dying declaration. The order passed by me 
on the application is from C to D and the signature is 
from E to F. After this, I recorded the dying declaration 
of Sugna Bai admitted in M.B.S. Hospital, Kota. Before 
recording the statement, I had taken a certificate from 
the duty doctor regarding the condition of giving the 
statement of Sugna Bai, the dying declaration is Exhibit 
P-20 on which the certificate of the doctor from E to F is 
mentioned and Sugna Bai was identified by Shri Gopal 
Lal, whose reference is mentioned from A to B. Sugna 
Bai’s dying declaration is recorded by me in the form of 
questions and answers. Exhibit P-20 has my signatures 
G to H. When the statement of Sugna Bai was recorded, 
she was in a position to give the statement and was 
3	
2023 SCC OnLine SC 1421

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
307
Shankar v. State of Rajasthan
conscious. After recording the said dying statement, 
the said statement and documents were sent by me to 
the concerned court through Exhibit P-22, on which my 
signatures A to B are there. 
CROSS EXAMINATION BY THE ADVOCATES OF 
ACCUSED :-
It is true that I had sent Exhibit P-22 to the concerned 
Court in my capacity as ACJM No.4 on which my seal is 
not marked. It is true that I did not put a note on the dying 
declaration Exhibit P-20 that injured was in a sound mind 
to give the statement, and today herself said that I had 
obtained a certificate in this regard from the duty doctor. It 
is true that there is no mention that the dying declaration 
is certified by the doctor. I first got the injured identified 
from Gopal Lal and then took the certificates from the 
doctor and after this the statements were recorded. On 
the day the application Exhibit P-19 was presented, I 
was working as the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kota. It is 
true that I have not written the word C.J.M. below my 
ordersheet. It is true that the name of the acting C.J.M. is 
not mentioned in in Exhibit P-19. That day I had remand 
duty and I was the one working. I am a resident of Jaipur. 
I could very well understand the language in which the 
injured gave her statement. I cannot say whether she 
was speaking Hadoti or Mewadi Language at that time, 
but I could been written in question-answer format as it is 
according to the law. It is wrong to say that since injured 
was not in a position to speak, I took injured’s statement 
in question-answer format because that is as per law. It 
is true that I have not mentioned the time in my dying 
statement as to what time the statement was taken. It 
is wrong to say that I took the help of Gopal Lal ASI to 
understand the language of religion. When I recorded 
Injured’s statement, only I and injured were present. No 
one else was present. I had sent injuried’s family out. I 
did not ask Majhruba’s mother whether Majhruba was in 
a position to give a statement or not. …..”

308
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
A perusal of the above extracted statement makes abundantly clear 
that nowhere did the officer state to the effect that the deceased not 
of sound mind. It is also evident that the duty doctor had given a 
certificate of her condition. PW-15 (Dr. Tez Pratap Singh) the duty 
doctor has testified that prior to giving the certificate on a blank 
paper he had examined the condition of the deceased. It stands 
to reason that, after the condition has been certified, only then, 
would the doctor record the statement on paper. The fact that it 
was on the flip side of the same paper does not affect the sanctity 
thereof. That being the case, we cannot appreciate the ground as 
raised by the appellant. 
11.	 Yet another point also needs to be addressed. Before the learned 
Trial Court the counsel for the accused attempted to argue that 
the parents of the deceased tutored her into giving the statement 
that she gave. However, we are of the considered view that such 
a submission, was correctly, not accepted by the Trial Court. It 
appears to us, to be nothing but a bald assertion. 
12.	 In this case, the eyewitnesses PW-2 (Brajmohan) and PW-3 
(Mamta Bai) have turned hostile and supported the prosecution 
case. In ordinary circumstances this would accrue to the favour of 
the accused. However, given the consistency of medical evidence 
with the dying declaration, the difference in events testified to by 
the above two witnesses would lose its significance. In respect of 
PW-3 and PW-8 (parents of the deceased), it be observed that 
apart from a vague implication of tutoring which has not made 
its way into either the examination-in-chief or cross examination, 
their statements cannot be challenged or kept aside. As such their 
statements cannot be of any use to the appellant, in discrediting 
the case of the prosecution. That apart the medical evidence as 
given by PW-9 (Dr. Navneet Parashar) and PW-10 (Dr. Rakesh 
Sharma) are consistent with the statement of the deceased that 
she was burnt. One of the grounds raised is that the evidence of 
PW-10 cannot be relied upon by the Court for the reason that he 
was not a practicing doctor and was only a ‘medical jurist’. That 
in our view, cannot be a reason to disregard his testimony for it 
is not the case that he was unqualified to give such a testimony 
nor is it the case that he was underqualified. Additionally, his 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
309
Shankar v. State of Rajasthan
testimony is also in line with the testimony of PW-9, Medical 
Officer at MBS Hospital, who has also deposed that the deceased 
was burnt and the cause of death was septicaemia due to 
burning. 
13.	 Taking a cumulative view of the above discussion, the appeal must 
fail, and is accordingly dismissed. However, before parting with the 
matter we deem it necessary to pen down a postscript.
14.	 The offence in question is of the year 2011. At that point in time, we 
were 64 years into being an independent country. The Constitution 
promises equality, non-discrimination on the basis of sex and the 
right to life and liberty amongst others. However, cases such as 
these, demonstrate that even after so many years, rights enshrined 
in the founding Charter are still elusive for many. It could be argued 
and very well proved that a further fourteen years down the line, in 
spite of incremental progress the issues highlighted by the incidence 
such as in the present case, largely remain the same. Over the 
years numerous legislations were enacted, schemes brought into 
force, and judgments delivered, focussed on the upliftment of 
women and eradication of difficulties faced by them arising out of 
inherent social stigma and deep-rooted patriarchal and conservative 
practices. 
The process of unshackling the society from these deeply stigmatic 
understandings of women and their roles, began immediately after 
independence. Early legislative efforts such as the Dowry Prohibition 
Act, 1961 were aimed at dismantling one of the most deep-rooted 
practices of patriarchal control, i.e., dowry. This was followed by 
introduction of provisions like Section 498A, IPC addressing cruelty 
by husbands and relatives, and later the Protection of Women from 
Domestic Violence Act, 20054 which recognized domestic abuse 
as a civil wrong requiring immediate relief and protection. When it 
comes to equality in workplace, the Sexual Harassment of Women 
at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 
institutionalized safeguards following the Vishaka guidelines laid 
down by this Court. 
4	
DVA

310
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
The interpretation of these rights and their expansion into varied 
aspects of women’s life has taken place through a series of judicial 
pronouncements. In Shayara Bano v. Union of India5, the practice 
of instant triple talaq was declared unconstitutional, affirming women’s 
rights within personal law frameworks. In Joseph Shine v. Union 
of India6, the Court struck down the adultery law, emphasizing 
equality and autonomy. In Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. 
Babita Puniya7, the Court upheld the right of women officers to 
be granted permanent commission in the Indian Army, rejecting 
institutional stereotypes about gender roles. In Vineeta Sharma v. 
Rakesh Sharma8, daughters were recognized as equal coparceners 
in Hindu joint family property. The Court has also addressed the 
complexities of domestic violence, in Arnesh Kumar v. State of 
Bihar9, while cautioning against misuse of Section 498A, it reaffirmed 
the seriousness of cruelty against married women, and in Hiral P. 
Harsora v. Kusum Narottamdas Harsora10, it expanded the scope 
of the DVA to include complaints against female relatives within the 
household. The Court has further intervened in matters of personal 
liberty and choice. In Shakti Vahini v. Union of India11, it issued 
detailed guidelines to prevent honour killings, recognizing that societal 
and familial control over women’s choices in marriage is a direct 
assault on their fundamental rights. Similarly, in Shafin Jahan v. 
Asokan K.M12., the Court upheld an adult woman’s right to choose 
her partner, affirming that neither the State nor the family can dictate 
personal decisions central to individual dignity and autonomy.
15.	 Parallel to legal reform, the State has also invested in welfare and 
social transformation schemes. Programmes such as Beti Bachao, 
Beti Padhao, are aimed at correcting gender imbalances and 
improving girls’ education, while initiatives like Sukanya Samriddhi 
5	
(2017) 9 SCC 1
6	
(2018) 2 SCC 189
7	
(2020) 7 SCC 469.
8	
(2020) 9 SCC 1
9	
(2014) 8 SCC 273
10	
(2016) 10 SCC 165.
11	
(2018) 7 SCC 192.
12	
(2018) 16 SCC 368.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
311
Shankar v. State of Rajasthan
Yojana and Ujjwala Yojana aim to enhance financial security and 
improve living conditions for women. 
16.	 Yet, despite this sustained intervention from different branches of 
Government, empirical data shows that all is not well. It presents 
a sobering picture indeed. As per the National Crime Records 
Bureau, more than 4.48 lakh crimes against women were recorded 
in 202313. Dowry-related violence continues to claim over 6,000 
lives annually, revealing the persistence of practices that have long 
been outlawed. Complaints before the National Commission for 
Women also consistently show domestic violence as one of the most 
reported grievances14. What makes this reality particularly troubling 
is the context in which it exists. India has experienced significant 
economic growth, rising literacy, and increased participation of 
women in education and the workforce. Gender Roles do not apply 
strictly anymore in many urban areas. One cannot assume that all 
house-hold related work falls to the woman, whereas it is only the 
male who is tasked with bread winning. Yet, in rural and semi-urban 
scenarios, patriarchy remains a facet of everyday life. Authority 
within the household is still overwhelmingly male, and women’s 
autonomy is often conditional and constrained. Even if the woman 
earns, it would still be expected of her that she would set the house 
right before leaving for work, and busily engage herself in similar 
work including preparation of meals, when she returns from work. 
17.	 The coexistence of progress and violence signals to a paradox. 
Legal and economic advancements are visible on a macro-level, 
but patriarchy still permeates the everyday. Dowry is outlawed and 
has been for decades but the social legitimacy that sustains it is yet 
to be dismantled. Welfare schemes can incentivize education, but 
cannot alter long-held beliefs about women’s roles within marriage 
and family. As a result, practices such as domestic abuse or even 
extreme acts like burning a wife (such as in this case) persist 
not as aberrations, but as indications of a disease afflicted social 
order.
13	
https://www.ncrb.gov.in/uploads/files/1CrimeinIndia2023PartI1.pdf 
14	
https://ncwapps.nic.in/frmReportNatureState.aspx?Year=2023;  
https://ncwapps.nic.in/frmReportNatureState.aspx?Year=2024; 
https://ncwapps.nic.in/frmReportNatureState.aspx?Year=2025

312
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
18.	 After decades of laws, schemes, reforms, and judicial recognition 
of equality across workplaces, homes, personal relationships, and 
even the armed forces, why does the control over women’s bodies, 
choices, and lives still persist so deeply within society? Perhaps, 
the answer lies only with “We, the People of India”.
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey


