[2026] 4 S.C.R. 239 : 2026 INSC 265
V. Ganesan 
v. 
State Rep by the Sub Inspector of Police & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1470 of 2026)
19 March 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Manoj Misra,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the High Court was justified in declining to 
quash proceedings u/s.420 IPC.
Headnotes†
Penal Code, 1860 – s.420 – Offence of cheating – Appellant-
movie producer borrowed money from the complainant on 
assurance that it would be returned by a share in profits – 
Appellant issued two post-dated cheques towards return of 
the principal amount – Cheques dishonoured for insufficient 
funds in the account – Complaint for the offence of cheating 
and criminal breach of trust – Petition for quashing of report 
and consequential proceedings on the ground that it was a 
civil cause of action given a colour of criminal offence – High 
Court quashed the indictment of an offence punishable u/s.406 
but declined to quash proceedings qua the offence of cheating 
punishable u/s.420 – Correctness:
Held: Where the transaction between the parties is such that 
fulfilment of the promise is not entirely in the control of the promisor, 
or there is an inherent risk in fulfilment of the promise, the High Court 
may, in exercise of its inherent powers under the Code, or u/Art.226 
of the Constitution, as the case may be, upon consideration of the 
attending circumstances, take a decision whether the dishonest 
intention existed or not at the time of making the promise – And, if 
it comes to the conclusion that the alleged conduct of the parties 
does not reflect a dishonest intention of the accused from the very 
beginning, it may quash the criminal complaint/proceedings and 
relegate the aggrieved party to civil remedies – On facts, the initial 
payment of money by the complainant to the appellant was for a 
* Author

240
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
movie project on promise of a share in profits – Additional money 
was paid later for its completion under a promise of an enhanced 
share in the profits – No denial about the completion of the movie 
and its ultimate release, thus, the promise to make a movie not 
false, as also no dishonest intention of the appellant in making the 
promise which remained unfulfilled – Nature of transaction between 
the parties was a crucial factor in determining whether the investor 
party should be allowed to bring in a criminal action or pursue civil 
remedies – High Court overlooked the same – Post-dated cheques 
were not by way inducement to lend money or invest money in 
the proposed movie – Dishonour of those cheques, would not 
ipso facto amount to an offence of cheating – Thus, dishonour of 
a post-dated cheque by itself not sufficient to presume existence 
of a dishonest intention on part of its drawer – Thus, in absence 
of allegations that movie made profits, the complaint and the 
supporting materials failed to indicate that the appellant harboured 
a dishonest intention from inception – Allegations only disclosed 
a civil cause of action and the High Court erred in not quashing 
the criminal proceedings – Impugned judgment and order of the 
High Court set aside to the extent it declined quashing of the 
proceedings u/s.420 – Impugned criminal proceedings u/s.420 
quashed. [Paras 15, 17, 18, 20, 21]
Penal Code, 1860 – s.420 – Cheating – Necessary ingredients 
to constitute an offence of cheating:
Held: In order to constitute an offence of cheating the intention to 
deceive should be in existence when the inducement was made – 
It is necessary to show that a person had fraudulent or dishonest 
intention at the time of making the promise – Mere failure to keep 
the promise subsequently cannot be the sole basis to presume 
that dishonest intention existed from the very beginning. [Para 13]
Case Law Cited
Iridium India Telecom Ltd. v. Motorola Inc. [2010] 14 SCR 591 : 
(2011) 1 SCC 74; Vesa Holdings Private Limited and Another v. 
State of Kerala and Others [2015] 4 SCR 27 : (2015) 8 SCC 
293 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Constitution of India; Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973; Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
241
V. Ganesan v. State Rep by the Sub Inspector of Police & Anr.
List of Keywords
Cheating; Criminal breach of trust; Fraudulent; Dishonest intention; 
Civil cause of action; Quashing of the criminal proceedings; 
Dishonour of cheque; Criminal action; Promise of a share in profits; 
False promise; Dishonest intention from inception; Dishonest 
intention at the time of making the promise; Failure to keep the 
promise.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1470 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 06.04.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in CRLOP No. 847 of 2021
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
S. Nagamuthu, Sr. Adv., M.P. Parthiban, Ankur Prakash,  
Mrs. Priyanka Singh, Bilal Mansoor, Shreyas Kaushal, S. Geyolin 
Selvam, Alagiri K.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
V. Krishnamurthy, Sr. A.A.G., Sabarish Subramanian, Vishnu 
Unnikrishnan, Ms. Azka Sheikh Kalia, Ms. Jahnavi Taneja, Danish 
Saifi.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manoj Misra, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal impugns the judgment and order of the High Court at 
Madras1 dated 06.04.2023 in Crl. O.P. No. 847 of 2021 and Crl. 
M.P. No. 518 of 2021, whereby the prayer of the appellant to quash 
final report and consequential proceedings in C.C. No. 3569 of 2020 
on the file of the Metropolitan Magistrate (CCB and CBCID, Metro 
1	
The High Court

242
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Cases), Egmore, Chennai-600008, under Section 406 and 420 of 
the Indian Penal Code, 18602, was partly allowed to the extent of 
indictment under Section 406 IPC; however, the prayer to quash 
indictment under Section 420 IPC was declined.
3.	
In brief, the prosecution case, as could be evinced from the final 
report (i.e., police report) submitted under Section 173 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 19733, is that the accused (the appellant herein) 
was producing a ‘movie’. In the course of its production, he ran short 
of funds. He, therefore, requested the de-facto complainant (i.e., the 
second-respondent herein) to lend him money on assurance that it 
would be returned by a share in profits to the extent of 30%. Later, 
further money was lent on promise of an additional 17% share in 
profits. Ultimately, two post-dated cheques of Rs.24 lacs each were 
issued by the accused to the de facto complainant towards return 
of the principal amount which returned unpaid for insufficient funds 
in the account. Based on above, it was alleged that the accused 
had cheated the complainant and had also committed offence of 
criminal breach of trust.
4.	
Aggrieved by the police report and the consequential proceedings, 
the appellant invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 
482 of CrPC, inter alia, to quash the report and the consequential 
proceedings on the ground that a pure civil cause of action was 
given colour of a criminal offence.
5.	
By the impugned order, the High Court quashed the indictment of an 
offence punishable under Section 406 IPC but declined to quash the 
proceedings qua the offence of cheating punishable under Section 
420 IPC.
6.	
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
7.	
On behalf of the appellant it is submitted that admittedly the 
second-respondent had invested money in a movie project on 
expectation of good returns. There is no dispute that the movie 
project was completed. However, it could not generate profits. In 
such circumstances, the appellant could not fulfil its commitment of 
providing good returns on the investment. Therefore, there was no 
2	
IPC
3	
CrPC

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
243
V. Ganesan v. State Rep by the Sub Inspector of Police & Anr.
dishonest intention and the dispute between the parties is purely civil 
in nature. Hence, institution and continuation of criminal proceedings 
is nothing but abuse of the process of Law.
8.	
Per contra, on behalf of the respondent(s) it is submitted that dishonest 
intention of the appellant was there from the very beginning which is 
evident from the fact that the two cheques got dishonoured for want 
of funds. Besides, on appellant’s false assurance of profits, money 
was lent. In these circumstances, offence of cheating is made out.
9.	
We have accorded due consideration to the rival submissions and 
have perused the record.
10.	 The police report indicted the appellant for offences of criminal 
breach of trust and cheating punishable under Sections 406 and 
420 IPC respectively. The High Court came to the conclusion, and 
rightly so, that no offence punishable under Section 406 of IPC is 
made out as there was no entrustment. Regarding the offence of 
cheating, the High Court concluded that prima facie it is made out. 
The reasoning of the High Court in support of its conclusions can 
be found in paragraph 6 of its judgment, which is extracted below:
“This Court on perusal of the impugned final report finds 
that the offence under Section 406 IPC is not made out. 
There is no entrustment made to the petitioner, in order 
to attract the offence of criminal breach of trust. However, 
this Court finds that there was an Agreement between the 
petitioner and the de-facto complainant on 30.12.2013. 
The Agreement shows that the petitioner promised 30% 
interest on the initial invested amount on Rs. 19,60,000/-. 
Thereafter, the de-facto complainant paid Rs. 27,00,000/- 
on 03.04.2014; and the petitioner had promised 47% profit 
on the invested amount. The petitioner had not made any 
payment to the de-facto complainant/second-respondent 
as promised. While so, the de-facto complainant/second-
respondent objected to the petitioner releasing the movie. 
The petitioner had given one more undertaking letter, 
wherein, he had promised to pay the principal sum in two 
instalments, profit on a subsequent date; and that if the 
project did not yield any profit, he would pay an interest 
on the said sum of Rs. 48,00,000/-. All the above facts, 
disclose that at every stage, the representation has been 

244
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
made to the de-facto complainant to induce him to part with 
money. The allegations prima facie disclose the offence 
under Section 420 IPC. In the facts of the instant case, 
the question whether it was only a breach of promise or 
cheating has to be adjudicated only during trial. Therefore, 
this Court is not inclined to quash the impugned final report 
in so far as the offence under Section 420 IPC. Hence, 
the impugned final report is quashed only in respect of 
offence under Section 406 IPC. However, the learned 
Metropolitan Magistrate may try the case on the basis of 
evidence adduced before him without being influenced by 
any of the observations made in this order. The learned 
Metropolitan Magistrate (CCB and CBCID, Metro Cases), 
Egmore, Chennai – 600 008 may conduct the trial as 
expeditiously as possible4”.
11.	 The above extract makes it clear that the High Court was of the view 
that as the money was advanced on a promise of good returns and, 
subsequently, an undertaking was also given to return the principal 
amount if the project did not yield any profit, it could be taken that 
the complainant parted with his money on the inducement of the 
appellant and therefore, prima facie, an offence punishable under 
Section 420 IPC is made out. 
12.	 In Iridium India Telecom Ltd. v. Motorola Inc.5, this Court laid down 
the ingredients of an offence of cheating as defined in Section 4156 
of IPC. It was observed that Section 415 of IPC has two parts. The 
first part makes it necessary that the deception by the accused of the 
person deceived, must be fraudulent or dishonest. Such deception 
must induce the person to either: (a) deliver property to any person; 
or (b) consent that any person shall retain any property. The second 
part also requires that the accused must by deception intentionally 
induce the person deceived either to do or omit to do anything which 
4	
Extracted from typed copy of the judgment placed on record. May contain typographical mistakes.
5	
(2011) 1 SCC 74, paragraph 68
6	
Section 415. Cheating. -- Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the 
person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any 
property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not 
do or omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or 
harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to ‘cheat’.
Explanation. --- A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of this section.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
245
V. Ganesan v. State Rep by the Sub Inspector of Police & Anr.
he would not do or omit, if he was not so deceived. Besides, such act 
or omission must cause or must be likely to cause damage or harm 
to that person in body, mind, reputation or property. Thus, deception 
is a necessary ingredient for the offence of cheating under both 
parts of this section. Besides, the complainant must allege/ prove 
that the inducement had been caused by the deception exercised 
by the accused. In other words, such deception must produce the 
inducement to part with or deliver property, which the complainant 
would not have parted with or delivered, but for the inducement 
resulting from such deception. The explanation to the section clarifies 
that non-disclosure of relevant information would also be treated as 
a misrepresentation of facts leading to deception. 
13.	 In order to constitute an offence of cheating the intention to deceive 
should be in existence when the inducement was made. It is necessary 
to show that a person had fraudulent or dishonest intention at 
the time of making the promise. Mere failure to keep the promise 
subsequently cannot be the sole basis to presume that dishonest 
intention existed from the very beginning. 
14.	 In Vesa Holdings Private Limited and Another v. State of Kerala 
and others7, this court held that every breach of contract would not 
give rise to an offence of cheating. Only in those cases breach of 
contract would amount to cheating where there was any deception 
played at the very inception. If the intention to cheat has developed 
later, the same cannot amount to cheating. In other words, for 
the purpose of constituting an offence of cheating, the complaint 
is required to show that the accused had fraudulent or dishonest 
intention at the time of making promise or representation. Even 
in a case where allegations are made about failure on part of the 
accused to keep his promise, in absence of a dishonest intention 
at the time of making the initial promise, no offence under Section 
420 of IPC is made out. 
15.	 Whether non-fulfilment of promise/ commitment by the accused is 
a reflection of his or her dishonest intention at the time of making 
the promise is ordinarily a matter of trial. However, in our view, 
where the transaction between the parties is such that fulfilment of 
the promise is not entirely in the control of the promisor, or there 
7	
(2015) 8 SCC 293, paragraph 12

246
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
is an inherent risk in fulfilment of the promise, the High Court may, 
in exercise of its inherent powers under the Code, or under Article 
226 of the Constitution, as the case may be, upon consideration of 
the attending circumstances, take a decision whether the dishonest 
intention existed or not at the time of making the promise. And, if 
it comes to the conclusion that the alleged conduct of the parties 
does not reflect a dishonest intention of the accused from the very 
beginning, it may quash the criminal complaint/ proceedings and 
relegate the aggrieved party to civil remedies. 
16.	 In the present case, what the High Court overlooked is that money 
was advanced for movie making and initially the agreement was 
to share the profits. Importantly, when the first tranche of money 
was transferred by the de-facto complainant to the accused, the 
alleged promise was a share in profits. Second tranche of money 
was transferred when the project could not be completed for want 
of funds. It also appears from paragraph 2 of the impugned order 
that before the movie could be released, de facto complainant took 
objection to its release. However, when the appellant gave two post-
dated cheques, the movie could be released. 
17.	 The aforesaid facts would indicate that the initial payment of money 
by the de-facto complainant to the appellant was for a movie project 
on promise of a share in profits. Additional money was paid later for 
its completion under a promise of an enhanced share in the profits. 
Thereafter, post-dated cheques were issued to return the principal 
amount because of an objection taken by the de facto complainant 
to the release of the movie. Since there is no denial about the 
completion of the movie and its ultimate release, what is clear is 
that the promise to make a movie was not false. Therefore, it cannot 
be said the appellant made a false promise that he would make a 
movie with the aid of funds received by him. Insofar as promise qua 
sharing of profits is concerned, there are no allegations that the 
movie earned profits. Therefore, from the allegations made in the 
complaint it cannot be said that there was any dishonest intention 
of the appellant in making the promise which remained unfulfilled. 
In our view, the High Court overlooked that movie making is a high 
risk business. No one can be sure whether a movie would earn 
profits or would be a flop. If one agrees to share profits in lieu of his 
investment in a movie, he takes the risk of a possible zero return. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
247
V. Ganesan v. State Rep by the Sub Inspector of Police & Anr.
Thus, the nature of transaction between the parties was a crucial 
factor in determining whether the investor party should be allowed 
to bring in a criminal action or pursue civil remedies. Unfortunately, 
the High Court overlooked this vital aspect. 
18.	 Insofar as dishonour of those two cheques are concerned, it is clear 
that those were post-dated cheques issued not as an inducement 
to obtain delivery of money from the de facto complainant but to 
discharge an existing obligation at a future date. Thus, in essence, 
those cheques were not by way inducement to lend money or invest 
money in the proposed movie. Therefore, dishonour of those cheques, 
though may give right to initiate proceeding under Section 138 of 
the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, would not ipso facto amount 
to an offence of cheating, inasmuch as for an offence of cheating 
dishonest intention must exist from the very beginning. Ordinarily, 
post-dated cheques are issued either by way of security to discharge 
an existing or future liability or to discharge the liability at some point 
of time in future. It is quite possible that at the time of issuance of 
a post-dated cheque, the drawer may have reason to believe that 
he would have sufficient balance in his account by the date of the 
cheque. Therefore, in our view, dishonour of a post-dated cheque by 
itself is not sufficient to presume existence of a dishonest intention 
on part of its drawer.
19.	 In the instant case, there is nothing to indicate that the appellant had 
a dishonest intention from the very beginning. Had it been a case 
where the appellant had not made the movie despite borrowing funds 
to make one, an inference about existence of a dishonest intention 
was permissible. However, here there is no allegation that movie 
was not made. Rather, it was made and released. The prosecution 
case itself is to the effect that further advance was taken to complete 
and release the movie. However, when complainant took objection 
to its release, the appellant issued post-dated cheques to repay the 
principal amount. Thus, those cheques were to discharge an existing 
liability and not by way of an inducement to take more money. 
20.	 Assuming that by issuance of those cheques, the de facto complainant 
was led to vacate his objection to movie’s release, even then an 
offence of cheating would not be made out for two reasons. First, those 
cheques were post-dated therefore, did not carry a representation 
of sufficient funds in the bank account at the time of its issuance. 

248
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Second, initial agreement, as per the allegations, was to share profit 
on release of the movie. Thus, in absence of allegations that movie 
made profits, in our view, the complaint and the supporting materials 
failed to indicate that the appellant harboured a dishonest intention 
from inception. In conclusion, the allegations only disclosed a civil 
cause of action and the High Court fell in error in not quashing the 
criminal proceedings. 
21.	 For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed. The impugned 
judgment and order of the High Court is set aside to the extent it 
declined quashing of the proceedings under Section 420 IPC. The 
impugned criminal proceedings under Section 420 IPC are also 
quashed. Pending applications if any stands disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
