[2026] 4 S.C.R. 58 : 2026 INSC 236
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram,  
Thr. President Shri L. Chinzah 
v. 
Union of India & Ors.
(Writ Petition (Civil) No. 22 of 2014)
13 March 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala* and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The present writ petition has been filed by the Mizo Chief Council, 
through its President, on behalf of the tribal chieftains. The primary 
grievance of the petitioner is that the respondents seized/acquired 
the lands of these chieftains without paying due compensation. 
The following questions fall for consideration: (i) Whether the writ 
petition is hit by delay and laches; (ii) Whether any fundamental 
rights of the Mizo Chiefs were violated.
Headnotes†
Assam Lushai Hills District (Acquisition of Chief’s Rights) Act, 
1954 – Constitution of India – Doctrine of delay and laches 
in Art.32 petition – The instant writ petition filed by the Mizo 
Chief Council on behalf of the tribal chieftains of the erstwhile 
Lushai Hills district (present-day State of Mizoram) and their 
legal heirs – By virtue of 1954 Act, the State was enabled to 
acquire certain rights and interests of the Chiefs in and over 
the land located in the Lushai Hills district – On 23.03.1955, 
a notification was issued in exercise of the powers conferred 
by s.3(1) of the Act, 1954, declaring that the right and interest 
of the chiefs in the Ram (territory of chiefs) specified in the 
Schedule thereto would stand transferred to and vested in the 
State free from all encumbrances (impugned notification) – The 
primary grievance of the petitioner is that the respondents 
seized/acquired the lands of these chieftains without paying 
due compensation – Further, petitioner contends that this 
deprivation violated the fundamental rights of the Mizo Chiefs, 
specifically the right to property, which was guaranteed at 
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
59
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
the time of the acquisition – Respondents submits that the 
petition is not maintainable owing to delay and laches in filing 
the same and Mizo Chiefs cannot be classified as the absolute 
owners of the land – Correctness:
Held: Undeniably, there has been an inordinate delay of nearly six 
decades, given that the impugned notification was issued in the 
year 1955 and the present petition was instituted only in the year 
2014 – What is important is to gauge if the petitioner has a cogent 
explanation for the delay – In the decades immediately following 
Independence, the administrative and constitutional status of the 
area was in a state of continuous evolution – Another mitigating 
circumstance is the Mizo Chiefs’ continuous agitation of their claims 
before various forums – The chiefs persisted with administrative 
representations for a prolonged duration, a crucial factor warrants 
specific attention – Further fortifying this expectation is the fact that 
the Chief Minister of Mizoram, on at least two distinct occasions, 
addressed formal communications to the Prime Minister of India, 
espousing the chiefs’ claims for compensation – Weighing the 
totality of these circumstances, this Court is conscious of the fact 
that the delay herein is undeniably inordinate, and the explanation 
offered by the petitioner is, strictly speaking, not unequivocally 
convincing – In the present case, the central dispute concerns the 
alleged violation of the Mizo Chiefs’ right to property, as guaranteed 
under Arts.19(1)(f) and 31 of the Constitution, respectively – In an 
effort to discharge the burden of establishing title to the land, the 
petitioners have primarily relied on accounts and writings of scholars 
and officials of the British government – Upon a meticulous perusal 
of the said material, it is, at the very outset, highly ambiguous 
whether these texts unequivocally recognise the Mizo Chiefs as 
the absolute owners of the land – The petitioners have advanced 
no compelling justification as to why such writings and accounts 
should be elevated to the status of conclusive evidentiary proof – 
The material adduced by the respondent, at least on a prima facie 
examination, indicates that during the British administration of 
the Lushai Hills district, the title over the land never vested in the 
Chiefs – Consequently, this Court is constrained to hold that the 
petitioners have woefully failed to discharge their burden of proving 
title over the subject lands – Both sides have failed to present a 
continuous, documented chain of events that would clearly map 
out the status of the land at different periods – Therefore, having 
considered the matter from all vantage points, the inescapable 

60
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
conclusion is that the petitioner has not been able to establish 
any violation of the fundamental rights of the Mizo Chiefs in the 
present matter. [Paras 55, 57-61, 65, 68, 69, 74]
Constitution of India – Art.32 – Doctrine of Delay and Laches 
in Art.32 Petitions:
Held: It is settled law that in the context of petitions under Article 
32, the doctrine of laches operates as a flexible rule of practice 
rather than a rigid rule of law to be mechanically applied – Its 
application is anchored in sound judicial discretion, moulded by 
the specific facts and circumstances of each case – In application 
of the said doctrine the inquiry shall be guided by three primary 
considerations: first, whether there has been an inordinate delay 
in approaching the Court; secondly, whether the petitioner has 
provided a cogent and satisfactory explanation for such delay; and 
thirdly, whether entertaining the belated claim would unsettle settled 
matters and prejudice third party rights by reopening matters long 
concluded – Consideration should be given to the totality of the 
circumstances affecting both parties, rather than the mere fact of 
delay – When evaluating the totality of circumstances for applying 
the doctrine of delay and laches to an Art.32 petition, the pivotal 
considerations are two-fold: (i) whether entertaining the claim would 
unsettle concluded matters and prejudice third-party rights, and 
(ii) whether the petitioner has offered a cogent explanation for the 
delay – The adequacy of the explanation for the delay constitutes 
the paramount consideration when determining whether an Art.32 
petition ought to be dismissed on the ground of laches – Stated 
differently, the operative test is not one of ‘unreasonable delay’ 
but of ‘unexplained delay’. [Paras 39-41, 44, 45]
Constitution of India – Arts. 19(1)(f), 31 – Constitution (Forty-
Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978:
Held: Right to property was earlier enshrined in Arts.19(1)(f) and 
31 of the Constitution – It may be noted that both these provisions 
were repealed by the Constitution (Forty-Fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978 – However, the 44th Amendment is prospective in its 
operation, and all laws passed and executive action taken prior 
to 20th June 1979 will continue to be judged by and be subject to 
the provisions of Part III, including Arts.19(1)(f) and 31 – Art.19(1)
(f) guaranteed to the Indian citizens a right to acquire, hold, and 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
61
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
dispose of property – Art.19(5), however, permitted the State to 
impose by law reasonable restrictions on this right in the interests 
of the general public or for the protection of the interests of any 
Scheduled Tribe – Art.31(1) laid down that no person could be 
deprived of his property without the authority of law – Art.31(2), 
on the other hand, underwent significant change and was the 
focal point of multiple constitutional amendments. [Paras 63, 64]
Burden of Proof – Fundamental Right violation – Burden of 
proof in cases where fundamental rights violations:
Held: It is established that who bears the burden of proof in 
cases where fundamental rights violations are alleged depends 
on the fundamental right alleged to have been violated – The 
same burden of proof rule will not apply to all fundamental rights 
violation challenges – However, in cases such as the present 
one, the initial burden is on the petitioner to satisfy the Court and 
make out a case for an invasion of their fundamental right(s) – To 
discharge this initial burden and successfully establish a violation of 
their fundamental right to property, the petitioner must necessarily 
succeed on two distinct fronts – First and foremost, it must prove a 
clear title of the Mizo Chiefs over the subject lands – To establish 
such a title, the petitioner must conclusively demonstrate that, 
under the chieftainship system, as it operated during the British 
regime, the Mizo Chiefs held complete ownership of the land, rather 
than merely functioning as local administrative heads – Secondly, 
and only upon proving the ownership as aforesaid, the petitioner 
must satisfy the other parameters under Art.31 – This includes, 
amongst other things, proving that the respondents deprived the 
chiefs of their property without lawful authority, or that the property 
was acquired without providing due compensation – In the present 
case, petitioners have woefully failed to discharge their burden of 
proving title over the subject lands – The petitioner has not been 
able to establish any violation of the fundamental rights of the Mizo 
Chiefs in the present matter – Hence, not entitled to any relief. 
[Paras 66, 67, 69, 74]
Case Law Cited
Tilokchand and Motichand & Ors v. H.B. Munshi & Anr. [1969] 2 
SCR 824 : (1969) 1 SCC 110; Rabindranath Bose & Ors. v. Union 
of India & Ors. [1970] 2 SCR 697 : (1970) 1 SCC 84; R.S Deodhar 

62
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
& Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. [1974] 2 SCR 216 : (1974) 
1 SCC 31; Aflatoon & Ors v. Lt. Governor of Delhi & Ors. [1975] 
1 SCR 802 : (1975) 4 SCC 285 – followed.
Joginder Nath & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. [1976] 2 SCR 
553 : (1975) 3 SCC 459; G.P. Doval & Ors. v. Chief Secretary, 
Government of U.P. & Ors. [1985] 1 SCR 70 : (1984) 4 SCC 329; 
Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. 
[2014] 14 SCR 744 : (2015) 3 SCC 1 – relied on.
M/s Dehri Rotas Light Railway Company Limited v. District Board 
Bhojpur & Ors. [1992] 2 SCR 155 : (1992) 2 SCC 598; Rashid 
Ahmed v. Municipal Board, Kairana [1950] 1 SCR 566 : 1950 SCC 
OnLine SC 16; Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa & Ors. [1993] 
2 SCR 581 : (1993) 2 SCC 746; Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union 
of India [1984] 2 SCR 67 : (1984) 3 SCC 161; R.S. Makashi v. 
I.M. Menon [1982] 2 SCR 69 : (1982) 1 SCC 379; S.S. Moghe 
v. Union of India [1981] 3 SCR 875 : (1981) 3 SCC 271; Sukh 
Dutt Ratra & Anr v. State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors. [2022] 2 
SCR 1041 : (2022) 7 SCC 508; Navtej Singh Johar & Ors. v. 
Union of India [2018] 7 SCR 379 : (2018) 10 SCC 1; Indian 
Young Lawyers Association & Ors. v. State of Kerala [2018] 9 
SCR 561 : (2019) 11 SCC 1; Vidya Devi v. State of Himachal 
Pradesh & Ors. [2020] 1 SCR 749 : (2020) 2 SCC 569; Urban 
Improvement Trust v. Vidhya Devi & Ors. [2024] 12 SCR 993 : 
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3725; Daryao & Ors. v. State of U.P. & 
Ors. [1962] 1 SCR 574 : 1961 SCC OnLine SC 21; Prem Chand 
Garg & Anr v. The Excise Commissioner, U.P. & Ors. [1963] 
Supp. 1 SCR 885 : 1962 SCC OnLine SC 37; State of Orissa v. 
Pyarimohan Samantaray & Ors. (1977) 3 SCC 396; Karnataka 
Power Corpn. Ltd. v. K. Thangappan [2006] 3 SCR 783 : (2006) 4 
SCC 322; P.C. Sethi v. Union of India [1975] 3 SCR 201 : (1975) 
4 SCC 67; Purshottam Lal v. Union of India (1973) 1 SCC 651; 
Deena & Ors. v. Union of India [1984] 1 SCR 1 : (1983) 4 SCC 
645; A. Hamsaveni & Ors v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr. [1994] 
Supp. 2 SCR 404 : (1994) 6 SCC 51; Bokaro and Ramgur Ltd. 
v. State of Bihar [1962] Supp. 3 SCR 831 : 1962 SCC OnLine 
SC 379 – referred to.
Lindsay Petroleum Co. v. Prosper Armstrong Hurd (1874) 5 PC 
221 – referred to.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
63
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
List of Acts
Constitution of India; Constitution (Forty-Fourth Amendment) Act, 
1978; Assam Lushai Hills District (Acquisition of Chief’s Rights) 
Act, 1954; Lushai Hills District (Change of Name) Act, 1954; 
Government of India Act, 1935; Assam Frontier Tracts Regulation, 
1880; Scheduled District Act, 1874; Citizenship Act, 1955; Limitation 
Act, 1963.
List of Keywords
Delay; Laches; Fundamental Rights; Compensation; Mizo chief 
Council; Lushai Hills; Doctrine of delay and laches in Article 32 
petitions; Unexplained delay; Unreasonable delay; Transformative 
constitutionalism; Rectification of historical wrongs and systemic 
inequities; Mizo Chiefs’ fundamental right to property; Right 
to property under Articles 19(1)(f) and 31; Burden of proof 
in fundamental rights violations; Absolute ownership of land; 
Traditional chieftainship system; Boundary papers conferment of 
rights; Illusory statutory compensation; Privy purses; Erstwhile 
rulers of Princely States.
Case Arising From
ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Civil) No. 22 of 2014
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Petitioner(s):
D.N. Goburdhun, Sr. Adv., Lalremsanga Nghka, Kedar Nath 
Tripathy, Aditya Narayan Tripathy, Manoj Kumar Upadhyay, 
Siddhartha Jha, Chandan Ramamurthi, Rohan K.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
R Venkatarmani, Attorney General for India, Tushar Mehta, Solicitor 
General, Biswajit Deb, Sr. Adv, Advocate General, Rajat Nair,  
Ms. Suhashini Sen, Chinmayee Chandra, Akshay Amritanshu, 
Sachin Sharma, Kartikay Aggarwal, Chitvan Singhal,  
Ms. Ameyavikrama Thanvi, Raman Yadav, Abhishek Kumar Pandey, 
Arvind Kumar Sharma, Anando Mukherjee, Shwetank Singh, 
Mukesh Kumar Maroria, Rajat Nair, Ms. Suhasini Sen, Chinmayee 
Chandra, Akshay Amritanshu, Sachin Sharma.

64
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.B. Pardiwala, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the 
following parts: 
INDEX*
A.
FACTUAL MATRIX ............................................................
2
B.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER AND 
THE INTERVENOR ............................................................
7
C.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS ...
10
D.
ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED .........................................
11
E.
ANALYSIS ..........................................................................
12
(I)	
Whether the writ petition is hit by delay and laches? 12
(a)	 Doctrine of Delay and Laches in Article 32 
Petitions .............................................................
12
(b)	 Principles Governing the Application of Delay 
and Laches to Article 32 Petitions .....................
33
(c)	
Application to the facts of this matter ................
40
(II)	 Whether any fundamental rights of the Mizo Chiefs 
were violated? ............................................................
44
1.	
The present writ petition has been filed by the Mizo Chief Council, 
through its President, on behalf of the tribal chieftains of the erstwhile 
Lushai Hills district (present-day State of Mizoram) and their legal 
heirs. The primary grievance of the petitioner is that the respondents 
seized/acquired the lands of these chieftains without paying due 
compensation. The petitioner contends that this deprivation violated 
the fundamental rights of the Mizo Chiefs, specifically the right to 
property, which was guaranteed at the time of the acquisition.
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
65
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
A.	
FACTUAL MATRIX
2.	
To understand the dispute before us, it is indispensable to gauge how 
the society was structured and organised in the Lushai Hills district, 
both before and after the area was annexed and brought under the 
control of the British administration. It is pertinent to note that the 
limited objective here is to outline the broad administrative structure 
and the players involved, so as to provide the necessary context for 
evaluating the legal questions raised in the present petition.
3.	
Historically, Mizo society was centred around the institution of the 
chiefs. The petitioner asserts that these chiefs were the absolute 
owners of the lands upon which their respective villages were situated. 
This territory, referred to as the chieftain’s “Ram”, was administered 
by the chief, who exercised executive and judicial authority over it. 
It is further claimed that the chief allotted farmland from this Ram 
to the villagers and, in return, was entitled to receive “Fathang”, 
a customary tribute comprising a portion of the annual agricultural 
produce, primarily paddy.
4.	
Thereafter, the British made inroads and annexed the Lushai Hills 
district in the 1890’s. The administration of the district was vested 
in the Chief Commissioner of Assam, the Superintendent of the 
Lushai Hills district, his assistants, and the chief and headmen of 
the villages. Thus, following the British annexation, the colonial 
administration retained the Chieftainship system for administrative 
convenience. Chiefs were appointed to ensure good governance, 
and in return, they enjoyed the privilege of chieftainship. All chiefs 
were responsible for controlling their villages in every way. Thus, 
the day-to-day administration of the villages was left largely in the 
hands of the chief. The chief was entitled to collect Fathang and 
other taxes and, in turn, obliged to submit a portion of his collections 
to the British officers. 
5.	
It was, however, not the case that the Chiefs operated in complete 
freedom. The chiefs entered into an understanding called “Ramrilekha” 
with officials of the British government, whereby the boundaries or 
territorial extent of a chief’s authority and influence were roughly 
demarcated, and the chiefs were made to pledge loyalty to the 
British government (hereinafter referred to as “boundary paper”). 
These boundary papers also stated that the area specified therein 
would be the Chiefs’ Ram as long as they live, subject to them 

66
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
remaining loyal to the government, and that after their death, the 
superintendent shall appoint their successor, who in all probability 
would be their children. 
6.	
After the British entered the picture, while the chiefs retained 
administrative flexibility, their authority dwindled and was fettered by 
the British officials’ supervision. The Superintendent held a swathe 
of powers, such as the authority to: (i) regulate the succession to 
villages of deceased chiefs, to appoint guardians to minor chiefs, and 
to appoint chiefs or headmen (subject to the chief commissioner’s 
decision and due regard being had to the Lushai custom and 
hereditary rights of existing families of chiefs) (ii) authorise the 
partition of existing villages to form new villages and (iii) punish and 
dispose of chiefs for misconduct, subject to the Chief Commissioner’s 
confirmation. Further, the formation of new villages without the 
Superintendent’s prior sanction was forbidden. 
7.	
The administration of the Lushai Hills district continued on much 
the same lines until independence. Although supervised, the British 
government recognised that the chiefs contributed to the effective 
administration of the Lushai Hills district. 
8.	
When the Lushai Hills district was formed by amalgamating tracts 
known as North and South Lushai Hills in 1898, the district was 
governed by the Assam Frontier Tracts Regulation, 1880, and 
notifications were issued under the provisions of the aforesaid 
Regulation and the Scheduled District Act, 1874. Moreover, in 1936, 
the Lushai Hills district was designated as an excluded area under 
the Government of India Act, 1935. However, it is essential to note 
that there appears to be no single, comprehensive legislation that 
covered all aspects of governance in the region during this period 
of British Rule. Instead, the Lushai Hills district seems to have been 
administered through a patchwork of notifications, rules, and standing 
orders issued from time to time. 
9.	
Post-independence, the Lushai Hills district was administered as part 
of the state of Assam. Under the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution, the 
Lushai Hills district came to be recognised as an autonomous district 
and was governed by district and regional councils, in accordance 
with the provisions in the Sixth Schedule. Thereafter, the Lushai Hills 
district was renamed the Mizo District vide the Lushai Hills District 
(Change of Name) Act, 1954. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
67
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
10.	 In 1954, the Assam Lushai Hills District (Acquisition of Chief’s Rights) 
Act, 1954 (hereinafter “the Act, 1954”) was passed by the then State 
of Assam. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act, 1954, 
read as follows: 
“The chief in the Lushai Hills has been exercising certain 
administrative and judicial functions in respect of village 
administrative and in recognition of their services inherent 
to enjoy certain rights and privilege. With the growth of 
political consciousness, and the establishment of the 
District Council in the Lushai Hills, there has been an 
instant demand for the abolition of the system of chief. This 
can be done only under law providing for the acquisition 
of the rights of the chiefs in respect of “ Ram” (Chief’s 
land) and “ Fathang “ (Paddy tax) which are in the nature 
of rights to the property, after payment of compensation. 
Hence this Bill.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
11.	 The legislature enacted the Act, 1954, with the primary objective of 
enabling the State to acquire certain rights and interests of the Chiefs 
in and over the land located in the Lushai Hills district. To effectuate 
this purpose, the Act, 1954, empowered the State Government to issue 
a notification declaring that the rights and interests of a Chief in his 
Ram, as specified in the said notification, shall stand transferred to and 
absolutely vest in the State. Consequent to such transfer and vesting, 
the Act, 1954 laid down a comprehensive statutory scheme detailing 
the method for computation and disbursement of compensation, 
whilst also prescribing a specific adjudicatory procedure to resolve 
any disputes arising in relation to such compensation. Furthermore, 
the Act, 1954 mandates that upon such acquisition, all Ram shall be 
administered by the District Council or Regional Council, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the laws in force at that time. The relevant 
provisions of the 1954 Act are, for convenience, extracted below:
“Section 2 – Definitions 
[...]
2(p) – “Ram” means a tract or tracts of land held by a 
chief under a Ramrilekha or boundary paper issued by 
the competent authority

68
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
[...]
Section 3 – Notification declaring the vesting of “Ram” 
in the State
(1)	 The State Government may, from time to time, by 
notification declare that the rights and interests of 
a chief in his Ram specified in the notification shall 
stand transferred to and vest in the State free from 
all encumbrances. 
[...]
Section 4 – Consequence of such notification 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force or in any agreement or contract expressed 
or implied, on the publication of the notification referred 
to in section 3, all rights and interests of the Chief in the 
Ram shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in this 
Act, cease and shall vest absolutely in the State free from 
all encumbrances in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act with effect from the agricultural year next following the 
date of publication of such notification. 
Section 5 – Compensation how to be paid 
No compensation to any chief whose rights and interests 
in his Ram vest in the State under the provisions of this 
Act shall be payable except as provided for in this Act. 
Section 6 – Settlement of Rams
(1) The District Council or the Regional Council, as the 
case may be shall take over charge of any Ram, the rights 
and interests of the chief in which vest in the State. 
(2) All the Rams shall be administered by the District 
Council or the Regional Council, as the case may be, in 
accordance with the law for the time being in force in the 
Lushai Hills District.”
(Emphasis Supplied)

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
69
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
12.	 On March 23, 1955, a notification was issued in exercise of the 
powers conferred by Section 3(1) of the Act, 1954, declaring that the 
right and interest of the chiefs in the Ram specified in the Schedule 
thereto would stand transferred to and vested in the State free from all 
encumbrances (hereinafter referred to as “impugned notification”). 
13.	 Thereafter, the title/heading of Section 3 of the Act, 1954, was 
amended by the Assam Mizo District (Acquisition of Chief’s Rights) 
(Amendment) Act, 1955, from “Notification declaring the vesting of 
“Ram” in the State” to “Notification declaring the vesting in the State 
of a Chief’s rights and interest in his Ram”. 
14.	 A total of INR 14,78,980/- was paid to the chiefs as compensation 
under the Act, 1954. The petitioner claims that the compensation 
paid was limited to the Fathang and does not take into account the 
value of the lands that belonged to the chiefs and were subsequently 
vested in the State. Thus, no compensation was paid for the lands. 
15.	 After the passing of the Act, 1954, the Mizo chiefs have, over the 
decades, agitated their claim for compensation in respect of the 
land that came to be vested with the government before multiple 
forums. The record shows the plethora of correspondence between 
representatives of the chiefs and the State and Central Governments 
on this issue. In fact, the issue was agitated by the petitioner before 
the Guwahati High Court at least on two occasions. On both occasions, 
the High Court disposed of the matter without delving into its merits, 
hoping it would be amicably resolved between the parties. However, 
no settlement was reached between the parties. 
16.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the petitioner is before this 
Court with this present writ petition. 
17.	 Further, an intervention application was filed by the Lushai Chief 
Association, which was allowed vide this Court’s order dated 
August 13, 2025. 
B.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER AND THE 
INTERVENOR
18.	 Broadly stated, the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner 
and the intervenor are as follows: 
a.	
Historically, the Mizo Chiefs were the absolute owners of 
the entire tract of land that presently constitutes the State 

70
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of Mizoram. The traditional Mizo chieftainship system was 
uniquely distinct from other indigenous landholding systems, 
which were typically characterised by communal or collective 
ownership. The Chiefs functioned as the absolute masters 
and monarchs of their respective domains, holding hereditary, 
complete, and exclusive proprietary rights over the territory. 
While the advent of British occupation curtailed certain powers 
held by the chiefs, the chiefs of the Lushai Hills district retained 
complete ownership of the territories. That the lands belonged 
to the chiefs is borne out by the traditional practices of the Mizo 
people and by the accounts and writings of British government 
scholars and officials. 
b.	
Post-independence, the chiefs were unlawfully deprived of the 
said lands without payment of any due compensation. The Act, 
1954 was highly circumscribed in its scope. It merely addressed 
the extinguishment of certain administrative rights and privileges 
of the Chiefs and did not address the ownership rights that the 
Chiefs held in the Ram. Consequently, the State’s actual taking 
over of the chiefs’ territorial lands was an executive action entirely 
devoid of statutory authority. Since the deprivation of their land 
was completely without the authority of law, it violated the right 
to property, which was, at the relevant time, recognised as a 
fundamental right under Part III of the Constitution. Such an 
arbitrary action of the State also violates Articles 14 and 21 of 
the Constitution. 
c.	
Even if this Court were to construe the Act, 1954, as a law 
which provided for the acquisition of the said lands, the 
statutory compensation provided and disbursed thereunder was 
completely ‘illusory’ and a mere pittance in exchange for the vast 
tracts of land that the State effectively expropriated and acquired. 
Such payment of ‘illusory’ compensation is also violative of the 
fundamental right to property. Therefore, from whichever angle 
the issue is looked at, the inescapable conclusion remains that 
the fundamental rights of the Mizo Chiefs, especially that of the 
right to property, were unconstitutionally breached. 
d.	
The State’s actions also suffer from the vice of manifest 
arbitrariness. The Mizo Chiefs stood on an equal footing with 
the rulers of the erstwhile Princely States. While the Princely 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
71
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
rulers across the country were systematically integrated into 
the Union with the solemn guarantee of privy purses, the Mizo 
Chiefs were arbitrarily singled out and denied such privileges. 
Consequently, such actions on behalf of the State constitute 
a breach of the guarantee bestowed under Article 14 of the 
Constitution. 
e.	
The respondents have taken contradictory stances, prolonging 
the issue for many decades under the pretext of resolving it 
amicably. They cannot contend that the issue is now time-
barred. The plethora of correspondence presented shows that 
the petitioner/Mizo Chiefs have consistently pursued the issue 
since its inception. 
f.	
Under the Sixth Schedule, the District Council had the exclusive 
power to make laws regarding the allotment, occupation, or use 
of land. Thus, the State of Assam (the parent state in 1954) 
lacked the legislative power to enact the Act, 1954, effectively 
overriding the District Council’s powers. 
19.	 On the basis of the above, the learned counsel prayed that there 
being merit in their petition, the same may be allowed and: (i) the 
impugned notification be set aside; and (ii) the chiefs be granted 
such compensation, as this Court deems fit, by the respondents 
in lieu of their actions which had violated their fundamental rights. 
C.	
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
20.	 Broadly stated, the submissions made on behalf of respondent no. 1 
(Union of India) and respondent no.2 (State of Mizoram) are as follows: 
a.	
The present writ petition is impractical as the petitioner is virtually 
seeking compensation for the entire state of Mizoram. Further, 
Article 32 cannot be invoked to reignite settled matters that 
reached administrative finality decades ago. The petitioner’s 
claims are hopelessly time-barred. 
b.	
Mizo Chiefs cannot be classified as the absolute owners of 
the land. Whatever customary authority the Chiefs may have 
historically wielded, any semblance of absolute proprietary 
title was extinguished following the advent of the British 
administration in the Lushai Hills district. The entire district 

72
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
was brought under the supervision of the British officials, and 
the Chiefs were reduced to mere intermediaries, exercising 
administrative control over specific tracts of land strictly on the 
basis of boundary papers issued by the British regime. Further, 
the area continued to be governed by the rules and regulations 
established by the British administration till the abolition of the 
chieftainship after the passing of the Act, 1954, and the issuance 
of the impugned notification. 
c.	
The petitioner has failed to adduce any cogent documentary or 
historical evidence to substantiate its lofty and sweeping claims 
of absolute, hereditary ownership. Therefore, the foundational 
premise of the petitioner’s case, that the Mizo Chiefs were 
unconstitutionally deprived of their private property, is factually 
unsubstantiated.
d.	
The Act, 1954, was enacted solely to disband the traditional 
chieftainship system and to extinguish the administrative rights 
and privileges that the Chiefs exercised over their respective 
Rams. Accordingly, the statutory compensation provided 
for and duly disbursed under the Act, 1954, was intended 
solely to recompense the Chiefs for the loss of these specific 
administrative rights. The petitioner’s contention that the 
compensation is ‘illusory’ is entirely misconceived and falls 
flat, as it erroneously compares the compensation amount to 
the value of land that the Chiefs never legally owned in the 
first place.
21.	 On the basis of the above, the learned counsel for the respondents 
prayed that there being no merit in the present writ petition, the 
same may be dismissed. 
D.	
ISSUES TO BE DETERMINED
22.	 Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and having gone 
through the materials on record, the following questions fall for our 
consideration: 
a.	
Whether the writ petition is hit by delay and laches?
b.	
Whether any fundamental rights of the Mizo Chiefs were 
violated?

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
73
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
E.	
ANALYSIS
(I)	
Whether the writ petition is hit by delay and laches?
23.	 Before adverting to the merits of the rival contentions regarding the 
alleged infringement of the Mizo Chiefs’ fundamental right to property, 
it is incumbent upon us to address the threshold issue of delay and 
laches. The respondents have contended that the present petition is 
barred by a significant lapse of time and that its consideration would 
unsettle matters that are long settled. 
(a)	 Doctrine of Delay and Laches in Article 32 Petitions
24.	 To adjudicate this contention, it is apposite for us to examine how 
this Court has addressed the applicability of the doctrine of delay 
and laches to petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. 
The best starting point for any discussion on the doctrine of laches is 
the often-quoted passage from Lindsay Petroleum Co. v. Prosper 
Armstrong Hurd, reported in (1874) 5 PC 221, which states as 
follows: 
“Now the doctrine of laches in courts of equity is not 
an arbitrary or a technical doctrine. Where it would be 
practically unjust to give a remedy, either because the 
party has, by his conduct, done that which might fairly be 
regarded as equivalent to a waiver of it, or where by his 
conduct and neglect he has, though perhaps not waiving 
that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in which 
it would not be reasonable to place him if the remedy were 
afterwards to be asserted, in either of these cases, lapse 
of time and delay are most material. But in every case, 
if an argument against relief, which otherwise would be 
just, is founded upon mere delay, that delay of course not 
amounting to a bar by any statute of limitations, the validity 
of that defence must be tried upon principles substantially 
equitable. Two circumstances, always important in such 
cases are, the length of the delay and the nature of the 
acts done during the interval, which might affect either party 
and cause a balance of justice or injustice in taking the 
one course or the other, so far as it relates to the remedy.”

74
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
25.	 In the Indian legal landscape, this Court’s Constitution Bench 
decision in Tilokchand and Motichand & Ors v. H.B. Munshi & 
Anr, reported in (1969) 1 SCC 110, serves as the primary entry 
point for any discussion regarding the applicability of the doctrine of 
laches to petitions filed under Article 32. The seminal issue before 
the Bench was whether the remedy under Article 32, which itself is 
a fundamental right, could be fettered by any period of limitation, 
i.e., whether any time limit could be imposed on petitions under 
Article 32. While the Court dismissed the petition by a 3:2 majority 
on merits, the legal principles enunciated regarding the application of 
the doctrine of laches are of primary importance. The majority held 
that delay and laches are factors that can be considered in Article 
32 petitions, and that this Court is not precluded from declining relief 
where a petitioner approaches the Court after an inordinate delay. 
The relevant observations crystallising this view are extracted below: 
M. Hidayatullah, C.J (as he then was)
“7. It follows, therefore, that this Court puts itself in restraint 
in the matter of petitions under Article 32 and this practice 
has now become inveterate. The question is whether this 
Court will inquire into belated and stale claims or take 
note of evidence of neglect of one’s own rights for a long 
time? I am of opinion that not only it would but also that 
it should. The party claiming Fundamental Rights must 
move the Court before other rights come into existence. 
The action of courts cannot harm innocent parties if their 
rights emerge by reason of delay on the part of the person 
moving the Court. This principle is well recognised and has 
been applied by Courts in England and America.
8. The English and American practice has been outlined in 
Halsbury›s Laws of England and Corpus Juris Secundum. 
It has been mentioned by my brethren in their opinions and 
I need not traverse the same ground again except to say 
this that Courts of Common Law in England were bound by 
the Law of Limitation but not the Courts of Chancery. Even 
so the Chancery Courts insisted on expedition. It is trite 
learning to refer to the maxim “delay defeats equity” or the 
Latin of it that the Courts help those who are vigilant and 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
75
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
do not slumber over their rights. The Courts of Chancery, 
therefore, frequently applied to suits in equity the analogy 
of the Law of Limitation applicable to actions at law and 
equally frequently put a special limitation of their own if 
they thought that the suit was unduly delayed. This was 
independently of the analogy of law relating to limitation. 
The same practice has been followed in the United States.
9. In India we have the Limitation Act which prescribes 
different periods of limitation for suits, petitions or 
applications. There are also residuary articles which 
prescribe limitation in those cases where no express period 
is provided. If it were a matter of a suit or application, either 
an appropriate article or the residuary article would have 
applied. But a petition under Article 32 is not a suit and it is 
also not a petition or an application to which the Limitation 
Act applies. To put curbs in the way of enforcement of 
Fundamental Rights through legislative action might well 
be questioned under Article 13(3). The reason is also quite 
clear. If a short period of limitation were prescribed the 
Fundamental Right might well be frustrated. Prescribing 
too long a period might enable stale claims to be made to 
the detriment of other rights which might emerge.
10. If then there is no period prescribed what is the 
standard for this Court to follow? I should say that utmost 
expedition is the sine qua non for such claims. The party 
aggrieved must move the Court at the earliest possible 
time and explain satisfactorily all semblance of delay. I 
am not indicating any period which may be regarded as 
the ultimate limit of action for that would be taking upon 
myself legislative functions. In England a period of 6 
months has been provided statutorily, but that could be 
because there is no guaranteed remedy and the matter is 
one entirely of discretion. In India I will only say that each 
case will have to be considered on its own facts. Where 
there is appearance of avoidable delay and this delay 
affects the merits of the claim, this Court will consider it 
and in a proper case hold the party disentitled to invoke 
the extraordinary jurisdiction.

76
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
11. Therefore, the question is one of discretion for this 
Court to follow from case to case. There is no lower limit 
and there is no upper limit. A case may be brought within 
Limitation Act by reason of some article but this Court 
need not necessarily give the total time to the litigant to 
move this Court under Article 32. Similarly in a suitable 
case this Court may entertain such a petition even after 
a lapse of time. It will all depend on what the breach of 
the Fundamental Right and the remedy claimed are when 
and how the delay arose.
S.M. Sikri, J.
14. Article 32(2) of the Constitution confers a judicial power 
on the Court. Like all judicial powers, unless there is an 
express provision to the contrary, it must be exercised in 
accordance with fundamental principles of administration 
of justice. [...] I understand that one of the fundamental 
principles of administration of justice is that, apart from 
express provisions to the contrary, stale claims should 
not be given effect to. But what is a stale claim? It is not 
denied that the Indian Limitation Act does not directly apply 
to a petition under Article 32. [....]
xxx
18. [...]The history of these writs both in England and 
the U.S.A. convinces me that the underlying idea of 
the Constitution was to provide an expeditious and 
authoritative remedy against the inroads of the State. If 
a claim is barred under the Limitation Act, unless there 
are exceptional circumstances, prima facie it is a stale 
claim and should not be entertained by this Court. But 
even if it is not barred under the Indian Limitation Act, 
it may not be entertained by this Court if on the facts of 
the case there is unreasonable delay. [...]It is difficult to 
lay down a precise period beyond which delay should be 
explained. I favour one year because this Court should 
not be approached lightly, and competent legal advice 
should be taken and pros and cons carefully weighed 
before coming to this Court. It is common knowledge that 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
77
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
appeals and representations to the higher authorities take 
time; time spent in pursuing these remedies may not be 
excluded under the Limitation Act, but it may ordinarily be 
taken as a good explanation for the delay.
19. It is said that if this was the practice the guarantee of 
Article 32 would be destroyed. But the article nowhere says 
that a petition, howsoever late, should be entertained and 
a writ or order or direction granted, howsoever remote the 
date of infringement of the fundamental right. In practice 
this Court has not been entertaining stale claims by persons 
who have slept over their rights. There is no need to depart 
from this practice and tie our hands completely with the 
shackles imposed by the Indian Limitation Act[....]
R.S Bachawat, J.
39. The next and the more fundamental question is whether 
in the circumstances the Court should give relief in a writ 
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution. No period of 
limitation is prescribed for such a petition. The right to 
move this Court for enforcement of fundamental rights is 
guaranteed by Article 32. The writ under Article 32 issues 
as a matter of course if a breach of a fundamental right 
is established. Technical rules applicable to suits like the 
provisions of Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure 
are not applicable to a proceeding under Article 32. But 
this does not mean that in giving relief under Article 32 
the Court must ignore and trample under foot all laws of 
procedure, evidence, limitation, res judicata and the like. 
Under Article 145(1)(c) rules may be framed for regulating 
the practice and procedure in proceedings under Article 
32. In the absence of such rules the Court may adopt any 
reasonable rule of procedure. Thus a petitioner has no 
right to move this Court under Article 32 for enforcement of 
this fundamental right on a petition containing misleading 
and inaccurate statements and if he files such a petition 
the Court will dismiss it, see Indian Sugars & Refineries 
Ltd.  v. Union of India, 1968 SCC OnLine SC 158. On 
grounds of public policy it would be intolerable if the Court 

78
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
were to entertain such a petition. Likewise the Court held 
in Daryao v. State of U.P. that the general principles of 
res judicata applied to a writ petition under Article 32. 
Similarly, this Court has summarily dismissed innumerable 
writ petitions on that ground that it was presented after 
unreasonable delay. 
40. The normal remedy for recovery of money paid to the 
State under coercion or mistake of law is by suit. Articles 
32 and 226 of the Constitution provide concurrent remedy 
in respect of the same claim. The extraordinary remedies 
under the Constitution are not intended to enable the 
claimant to recover monies, the recovery of which by 
suit is barred by limitation. Where the remedy in a writ 
application under Article 32 or Article 226 corresponds 
to a remedy in an ordinary suit and the latter remedy is 
subject to the bar of a statute of limitation, the Court in its 
writ jurisdiction acts by analogy to the statute, adopts the 
statute as its own rule of procedure and in the absence 
of special circumstances imposes the same limitation on 
the summary remedy in the writ jurisdiction. On similar 
grounds the Court of Chancery acted on the analogy 
of the statutes of limitation in disposing of stale claims 
though the proceeding in a Chancery was not subject 
to any express statutory bar, see Halsbury’s Laws of 
England, Vol. 14, page 647, Article 1190, Knox v. Gye. 
[LR 5 LH 656, 674] Likewise, the High Court acts on the 
analogy of the statute of limitation in a proceeding under 
Article 226 though the statute does not expressly apply 
to the proceeding. The Court will almost always refuse to 
give relief under Article 226 if the delay is more than the 
statutory period of limitation, see State of M.P. v. Bhailal 
Bhai at pp. 273-274. 
41. Similarly this Court acts on the analogy of the statute 
of limitation in respect of a claim under Article 32 of the 
Constitution though such claim is not the subject of any 
express statutory bar of limitation. If the right to a property 
is extinguished by prescription under Section 27 of the 
Limitation Act, 1963, the petitioner has no subsisting right 
which can be enforced under Article 32 (see Sobbraj 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
79
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
Odharmal v. State of Rajasthan ). In other cases where the 
remedy only and not the right is extinguished by limitation, 
it is on grounds of the public policy that the Court refuses 
to entertain stale claims under Article 32. The statutes of 
limitation are founded on sound principles of public policy. 
As observed in Whitley Stoke’s Anglo-Indian Codes, Vol. 
11, p. 940; “The law is founded on public policy, its aim 
being to secure the quiet of the community, to suppress 
fraud and perjury, to quicken diligence, and to prevent 
oppression”. In Ruckmaboye v. Lulloobhoy Mottichund 
[the Privy Council observed that the object of the statutes 
of limitation was to give effect to the maxim, “interest 
reipublicoe ut sit finis litium” (co litt 303) the interest of the 
State requires that there should be a limit to litigation. The 
rule of res judicata is founded upon the same rule of public 
policy, see Daryao v. State of U.P. at p. 584. The other 
ground of public policy upon which the statutes of limitation 
are founded is expressed in the maxim “vigilantibus non 
dormientibus jura subveniunt” (2 Co Inst. 690) the laws 
aid the vigilant and not those who slumber. On grounds 
of public policy the Court applies the principles of res 
judicata to writ petitions under Article 32. On like grounds 
the Court acts on the analogy of the statutes of limitation 
in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 32. [...]
G.K. Mitter, J.
65. The Limitation Acts do not in terms apply to claims 
against the State in respect of violation of fundamental 
rights. A person complaining of infraction of any such rights 
has one of three courses open to him. He can either make 
an application under Article 226 of the Constitution to a 
High Court or he can make an application to this Court 
under Article 32 of the Constitution, or he can file a suit 
asking for appropriate reliefs. The decisions of various High 
Courts in India have firmly laid down that in the matter 
of the issue of a writ under Article 226 the Courts have a 
descretion and may in suitable cases refuse to give relief 
to the person approaching it even though on the merits the 
applicant has a substantial complaint as regards violation 
of fundamental rights. Although the Limitation Act does not 

80
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
apply, the Courts have refused to give relief in cases of 
long or unreasonable delay. As noted above in Bhailal Bhai 
case, it was observed that the “maximum period fixed by 
the Legislature as the time within which the relief by a suit 
in a civil court must be brought may ordinarily be taken 
to be a reasonable standard by which delay in seeking 
remedy under Article 226 can be measured”. On the 
question of delay, we see no reason to hold that a different 
test ought to be applied when a party comes to this Court 
under Article 32 from one applicable to applications under 
Article 226. There is a public policy behind all statutes of 
limitation and according to Halsbury’s Laws of England 
(3rd Edn., Vol. 24), Article 330 at p. 181:
“The courts have expressed at least three 
different reasons supporting the existence 
of statutes of limitation, namely, (1) that long 
dormant claims have more of cruelty than justice 
in them, (2) that a defendant might have lost 
the evidence to disprove a stale claim and (3) 
that persons with good causes of action should 
persue them with reasonable diligence.
66. In my view, a claim based on the infraction of 
fundamental rights ought not to be entertained if made 
beyond the period fixed by the Limitation Act for the 
enforcement of the right by way of suit. While not holding 
that the Limitation Act applies in terms, I am of the view 
that ordinarily the period fixed by the Limitation Act should 
be taken to be a true measure of the time within which a 
person can be allowed to raise a plea successfully under 
Article 32 of the Constitution. [...]”
(Emphasis Supplied)
26.	 A close examination of the aforesaid excerpts reveals a clear judicial 
consensus: four out of the five learned Judges of the Bench agreed 
that the remedy under Article 32, though a fundamental right, is not 
immune from general principles of law and reasonable procedure. 
Consequently, petitions even under Article 32, seeking to agitate 
stale claims, ought not to be entertained. This restraint is largely 
rooted in the following factors: (i) the law assists those who are 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
81
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
vigilant, not those who sleep over their rights; (ii) actions of the 
courts cannot harm innocent third parties whose rights emerge by 
reason of delay i.e., entertaining long-dormant claims would disturb 
the settled position and unjustly prejudice third parties by placing 
an unreasonable burden on them to defend against claims after a 
prolonged period had passed (due to loss of evidence and change 
in context); and (iii) it is essential to put a time limit on proceedings 
to provide certainty and prevent confusion from cases being in 
perpetual flux. 
27.	 Further, a perusal of the above extracts reveals that the judicial opinion 
diverged on the precise yardstick to be applied when determining 
whether there has been a delay in instituting a petition under Article 
32. Some members of the Bench favoured drawing a strict analogy 
with the periods prescribed under the Limitation Act, 1963, whereas 
others advocated for a flexible approach. However, all four opinions 
recognised that Article 32 was not directly fettered by the Limitation 
Act, 1963, nor was any explicit period prescribed for instituting a 
petition under Article 32. In this context, the view propounded by 
Hidayatullah, C.J., emerged as the most pragmatic guide, holding 
that no fixed time limit could be laid down and that the question 
of delay is one of discretion to be exercised on a case-by-case 
basis. According to him, the decision would depend on: (i)whether 
the petitioner has offered a valid and plausible explanation for the 
delay, i.e. when and how the delay arose so as to gauge whether 
or not the delay was avoidable; (ii) whether the delay had affected 
the merits of the case and (iii) what the breach of fundamental right 
and the remedy claimed are. 
28.	 In Tilokchand (supra), K.S. Hegde, J., in his opinion, differed 
from the other four members on the Bench and held that a petition 
under Article 32 cannot be refused on the ground of laches. His 
dissent was primarily premised on an apprehension that treating the 
remedy under Article 32 as discretionary would dilute its status as a 
guaranteed fundamental right, potentially reducing it to the level of 
an ordinary civil right. The relevant excerpts of his dissenting opinion 
are reproduced below:
“77. Our Constitution makers in their wisdom thought that 
no fetters should be placed on the right of an aggrieved 
party to seek relief from this Court under Article 32. A 

82
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
comparison of the language of Article 226 with that of Article 
32 will show that while under Article 226 a discretionary 
power is conferred on the High Courts the mandate of 
the Constitution is absolute so far as the exercise of this 
Court’s power under Article 32 is concerned. Should this 
Court, an institution primarily created for the purpose of 
safeguarding the fundamental rights guaranteed under 
Part III of the Constitution, narrow down those rights? 
The implications of this decision are bound to be far 
reaching. It is likely to pull down from the high pedestal 
now occupied by the fundamental rights to the level of 
other civil rights. I am apprehensive that this decision 
may mark an important turning point in downgrading the 
fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution. 
I am firmly of the view that a relief asked for under Article 32 
cannot be refused on the ground of laches. The provisions 
of the Limitation Act have no relevance either directly or 
indirectly to proceedings under Article 32. Considerations 
which are relevant in proceedings under Article 226 are 
wholly out of place in a proceeding like the one before us. 
The decision of this Court referred to in the judgment of 
Bachawat and Mitter, JJ., where this Court has taken into 
consideration the laches on the part of the petitioners are 
not apposite for our present purpose. None of those cases 
deal with proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution. 
The rule enunciated by this Court in State of M.P. v. Bhailal 
Bhai , is only applicable to proceedings under Article 226. 
At p. 271 of the report, Das Gupta, J., who spoke for the 
Court specifically referred to this aspect when he says:
“That it has been made clear more than once 
that power to relief under Article 226 is a 
discretionary power.”
78. Therefore those decisions are of no assistance to us in 
deciding the present case. Once it is held that the power 
of this Court under Article 32 is a discretionary power — 
that in my opinion is the result of the decision of Bachawat 
and Mitter, JJ.—then it follows that this Court can refuse 
relief under Article 32 on any one of the grounds on which 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
83
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
relief under Article 226 can be refused. Such a conclusion 
militates not only against the plain words of Article 32 
but also the lofty principle underlying that provision. The 
resulting position is that the right guaranteed under that 
article would cease to be a fundamental right.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
29.	 In Rabindranath Bose & Ors v. Union of India & Ors., reported 
in (1970) 1 SCC 84, when dealing with claims relating to seniority 
in appointments under a writ petition, a Constitution Bench of this 
Court, upholding the principle laid down in Tilokchand (supra), 
reiterated that no relief would be given to petitioners who, without 
reasonable explanation, approach this Court under Article 32 of the 
Constitution after inordinate delay. The relevant observations made 
by this Court are as follows: 
“31. But insofar as the attack is based on the 1952 Seniority 
Rules, it must fail on another ground. The ground being 
that this petition under Article 32 of the Constitution has 
been brought about fifteen years after the 1952 Rules 
were promulgated and effect given to them in the Seniority 
List prepared on August 1, 1953. Learned counsel for 
the petitioners says that this Court has no discretion and 
cannot dismiss the petition under Article 32 on the ground 
that it has been brought after inordinate delay. We are 
unable to accept this contention. This Court by majority 
in Tilokchand Moti Chand v. H.B. Munshi held that delay 
can be fatal in certain circumstances. [...] 
32. The learned counsel for the petitioners strongly urges 
that the decision of this Court in Tilokchand Motichand 
case needs review. But after carefully considering the 
matter, we are of the view that no relief should be given 
to petitioners who, without any reasonable explanation, 
approach this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution 
after inordinate delay. The highest Court in this land has 
been given original jurisdiction to entertain petitions under 
Article 32 of the Constitution. It could not have been the 
intention that this Court would go into stale demands 
after a lapse of years. It is said that Article 32 is itself a 

84
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
guaranteed right. So it is, but it does not follow from this 
that it was the intention of the Constitution-makers that 
this Court should discard all principles and grant relief in 
petitions filed after inordinate delay. 
33. We are not anxious to throw out petitions on this ground, 
but we must administer justice in accordance with law and 
principles of equity, justice and good conscience. It would 
be unjust to deprive the respondents of the rights which 
have accrued to them. Each person ought to be entitled to 
sit back and consider that his appointment and promotion 
effected a long time ago would not be set aside after the 
lapse of a number of years. It was on this ground that 
this Court in Jaisinghani case observed that the order in 
that case would not affect Class II officers who have been 
appointed permanently as Assistant Commissioners. In 
that case, the Court was only considering the challenge 
to appointments and promotions made after 1950. In this 
case, we are asked to consider the validity of appointments 
and promotions made during the periods of 1945 to 1950. 
If there was adequate reason in that case to leave out 
Class II officers, who had been appointed permanently 
Assistant Commissioners, there is much more reason in 
this case that the officers who are now permanent Assistant 
Commissioners of Income Tax and who were appointed 
and promoted to their original posts during 1945 to 1950, 
should be left alone.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
30.	 In R.S Deodhar & Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors., reported 
in (1974) 1 SCC 317, the respondents raised a preliminary objection 
contending that the petition under Article 32 ought to be dismissed at 
the threshold on the ground of gross delay and laches. A Constitution 
Bench of this Court, however, repelled this contention and reasoned 
that: (i) the petitioners had offered a valid explanation for the delay; 
(ii) what was challenged in the petition was not a thing of the past 
and was still being followed, and thus its constitutionality should be 
adjudged; and (iii) the adjudication of the claim would not cause 
unjust prejudice or deprivation to the respondents. The relevant 
observations in this regard are extracted below: 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
85
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
“10. The first preliminary objection raised on behalf of 
the respondents was that the petitioners were guilty of 
gross laches and delay in filing the petition. The divisional 
cadre of Mamlatdars/Tehsildars were created as far back 
as November 1, 1956 by the Government Resolution of 
that date, and the procedure for making promotion to 
the posts of Deputy Collector on the basis of divisional 
select-list, which was a necessary consequence of the 
creation of the divisional cadre of Mamlatdars/ Tehsildars, 
had been in operation for a long number of years, at any 
rate from April 7, 1961, and the Rules of July 30, 1959 
were also given effect to since the date of their enactment 
and yet the petitioner did not file the petition until July 
14, 1969. There was a delay of more than ten or twelve 
years in filing the petition since the accrual of the cause 
of complaint, and this delay, contended the respondents, 
was sufficient to disentitle the petitioners to any relief in a 
petition under Article 32 of the Constitution. We do not think 
this contention should prevail with us. In the first place, 
it must be remembered that the rule which says that the 
Court may not inquire into belated and stale claims is not 
a rule of law, but a rule of practice based on sound and 
proper exercise of discretion, and there is no inviolable rule 
that whenever there is delay, the Court must necessarily 
refuse to entertain the petition. Each case must depend 
on its own facts. [...]Here the petitioners were informed 
by the Commissioner, Aurangabad Division, by his letter 
dated October 18, 1960 and also by the then Secretary 
of the Revenue Department in January 1961 that the 
rules of recruitment to the posts of Deputy Collector in the 
reorganised State of Bombay had not yet been unified, 
and that the petitioners continued to be governed by the 
rules of Ex-Hyderabad State and the Rules of July 30, 
1959 had no application to them. The petitioners were, 
therefore, justified in proceeding on the assumption that 
there were no unified rules of recruitment to the posts 
of Deputy Collector and the promotions that were being 
made by the State Government were only provisional to be 
regularised when unified rules of recruitment were made. 

86
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
It was only when the petition in Kapoor case was decided 
by the Bombay High Court that the petitioners came to 
know that it was the case of the State Government in that 
petition — and that case was accepted by the Bombay 
High Court — that the Rules of July 30, 1959 were the 
unified rules of recruitment to the posts of Deputy Collector 
applicable throughout the reorganised State of Bombay. 
The petitioners thereafter did not lose any time in filing 
the present petition. Moreover, what is challenged in 
the petition is the validity of the procedure for making 
promotions to the posts of Deputy Collector — whether it 
is violative of the equal opportunity clause — and since 
this procedure is not a thing of the past, but is still being 
followed by the State Government, it is but desirable that 
its constitutionality should be adjudged when the question 
has come before the Court at the instance of parties 
properly aggrieved by it .It may also be noted that the 
principle on which the Court proceeds in refusing relief 
to the petitioner on ground of laches or delay is that the 
rights which have accrued to others by reason of the delay 
in filing the petition should not be allowed to be disturbed 
unless there is reasonable explanation for the delay.[...] 
Here, as admitted by the State Government in para 55 of 
the affidavit in reply, all promotions that have been made 
by the State Government are provisional and the position 
has not been crystallised to the prejudice of the petitioners. 
No rights have, therefore, accrued in favour of others by 
reason of the delay in filing the petition. The promotions 
being provisional, they have not conferred any rights on 
those promoted and they are by their very nature liable 
to be set at naught, if the correct legal position, as finally 
determined, so requires. We were also told by the learned 
counsel for the petitioners, and that was not controverted 
by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State 
Government, that even if the petition were allowed and 
the reliefs claimed by the petitioners granted to them, that 
would not result in the reversion of any Deputy Collector 
or officiating Deputy Collector to the post of Mamlatdar/
Tehsildar; the only effect would be merely to disturb their 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
87
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
inter se seniority as officiating Deputy Collectors or as 
Deputy Collectors. Moreover, it may be noticed that the 
claim for enforcement of the fundamental right of equal 
opportunity under Article 16 is itself a fundamental right 
guaranteed under Article 32 and this Court which has 
been assigned the role of a sentinel on the qui vive for 
protection of the fundamental rights cannot easily allow 
itself to be persuaded to refuse relief solely on the jejune 
ground of laches, delay or the like. “
(Emphasis Supplied)
31.	 This Court, in Joginder Nath & Ors v. Union of India & Ors, 
reported in (1975) 3 SCC 459, relying upon the decisions in 
Tilokchand (supra), Rabindranath Bose (supra), and R.S Deodhar 
(supra) respectively, held that the preliminary objection raised on 
the grounds of delay and laches would not succeed in the facts and 
circumstances of the case as: first, there was no delay in filing the 
petition; and secondly, dealing with the petition would not unsettle 
long standing settled matters. The relevant observation made by 
this Court is as follows: 
“9. In our opinion on the facts and in the circumstances 
of this case the preliminary objection raised on behalf of 
the respondents cannot succeed. The first list fixing the 
seniority of the Judicial Officers initially recruited to the Delhi 
Judicial Service was issued on August 2, 1971. This was 
subject to revision on good cause being shown. Petitioners 
also, as we shall show hereinafter in this judgment on one 
ground or the other, wanted their position to be revised in 
the seniority list. They, however, did not succeed. A revised 
seniority list was issued on June 2, 1973. The filing of 
the writ petition was not designedly delayed thereafter. 
Since the petitioners position in the seniority list vis-a-vis 
Respondents 3 to 6 had not been disturbed in the new 
list dated June 2, 1973 it was sufficient for the petitioners 
to challenge the list dated August 2, 1971. We shall point 
out in this judgment that except the promotion to the 
posts of Additional District Judges, the seniority in relation 
to which also is under challenge in this writ application, 
nothing special had happened creating any right in favour 

88
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the respondents or no such position had been created 
the disturbance of which would unsettle the long standing 
settled matters. The writ application, therefore, cannot be 
thrown out on the ground of delay in regard to any of the 
reliefs asked for by the petitioners.”
32.	 In Aflatoon & Ors v. Lt. Governor of Delhi & Ors., reported in (1975) 
4 SCC 285, a Constitution Bench of this Court declined to entertain 
an Article 32 petition challenging land acquisition proceedings on 
the ground of inordinate delay and laches. This Court, on the facts 
of the case, held that the litigants acted in a non-vigilant manner 
by ‘sitting on the fence’ for a long period of time while the State 
completed the acquisition process and thereafter filed the petition 
at a highly advanced stage. Allowing such a non-vigilant petitioner 
to pursue the claims after inordinate delay, this Court held, would 
tantamount to putting a ‘premium on dilatory tactics’. The relevant 
observations made by this Court are as follows: 
“9. Assuming for the moment that the public purpose 
was not sufficiently specified in the notification, did the 
appellants make a grievance of it at the appropriate time? 
If the appellants had really been prejudiced by the non-
specification of the public purpose for which the plots in 
which they were interested were needed, they should 
have taken steps to have the notification quashed on that 
ground within a reasonable time. They did not move in 
the matter even after the declaration under Section 6 was 
published in 1966. They approached the High Court with 
their writ petitions only in 1970 when the notices under 
Section 9 were issued to them. In the concluding portion 
of the judgment in Munshi Singh v. Union of India, it was 
observed: [SCC p. 344, para 10]
“In matters of this nature we would have taken 
due notice of laches on the part of the appellants 
while granting the above relief but we are 
satisfied that so far as the present appellants are 
concerned they have not been guilty of laches, 
delay or acquiescence at any stage.”
We do not think that the appellants were vigilant.
xxx

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
89
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
11. Nor do we think that the petitioners in the writ petitions 
should be allowed to raise this plea in view of their conduct 
in not challenging the validity of the notification even after 
the publication of the declaration under Section 6 in 1966. 
Of the two writ petitions, one is filed by one of the appellants. 
There was apparently no reason why the writ petitioners 
should have waited till 1972 to come to this Court for 
challenging the validity of the notification issued in 1959 
on the ground that the particulars of the public purpose 
were not specified. A valid notification under Section 4 is 
a sine qua non for initiation of proceedings for acquisition 
of property. To have sat on the fence and allowed the 
Government to complete the acquisition proceedings on 
the basis that the notification under Section 4 and the 
declaration under Section 6 were valid and then to attack 
the notification on grounds which were available to them 
at the time when the notification was published would be 
putting a premium on dilatory tactics. The writ petitions are 
liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches and delay 
on the part of the petitioners (see Tilokchand Motichand 
v. H.B. Munshi and Rabindranath Base v. Union of India).”
(Emphasis Supplied)
33.	 In G.P. Doval & Ors v. Chief Secretary, Government of U.P. & 
Ors, reported in (1984) 4 SCC 329, this Court, while dealing with 
the contention that the petitioners had moved the Court after a long 
unexplained delay, made the following pertinent observation: 
“16. A grievance was made that the petitioners have 
moved this Court after a long unexplained delay and the 
Court should not grant any relief to them. It was pointed 
out that the provisional seniority list was drawn up on 
March 22, 1971 and the petitions have been filed in the 
year 1983. The respondents therefore submitted that 
the Court should throw out the petitions on the ground 
of delay, laches and acquiescence. It was said that 
promotions granted on the basis of impugned seniority 
list were not questioned by the petitioners and they have 
acquiesced into it. We are not disposed to accede to this 
request because Respondents 1 to 3 have not finalised 

90
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the seniority list for a period of more than 12 years and 
are operating the same for further promotion to the utter 
disadvantage of the petitioners. Petitioners went on making 
representations after representations which did not yield 
any response, reply or relief. Coupled with this is the 
fact that the petitioners belong to the lower echelons of 
service and it is not difficult to visualise that they may find 
it extremely difficult to rush to the court. Therefore, the 
contention must be rejected.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
34.	 The observation made by this Court in G.P. Doval (supra) adds an 
important dimension to the considerations that ought to be taken into 
account when deciding whether a petition under Article 32 is barred 
by delay or laches. This Court, in Rabindranath Bose (supra), R.S. 
Deodhar (supra), Joginder Nath (supra), and Aflatoon (supra) 
respectively, while deciding whether the petition was barred by delay 
or laches, scrutinised the issue from the vantage point of conduct 
and knowledge of the petitioners and whether there would be any 
disturbance to settled matters. However, in G.P. Doval (supra), it 
was explicitly recognised that extenuating circumstances inherent to 
the petitioner’s status, such as economic status, can also be one of 
the factors considered to validly explain a delay in approaching the 
Court. In essence, this Court acknowledged that the rigours of delay 
and laches cannot be mechanically applied where the petitioners, by 
virtue of their status, face genuine impediments in accessing justice. 
35.	 In Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha & Ors vs Union of India & Ors, 
reported in (2015) 3 SCC 1, this Court dealt with a batch of writ 
petitions under Article 32 challenging Section 6A of the Citizenship 
Act, 1955. The respondents raised a preliminary objection, contending 
that since Section 6A was enacted in 1985, a challenge mounted in 
2012 was barred by delay and laches. While examining this contention, 
this Court comprehensively reviewed the jurisprudence on delay and 
laches in Article 32 petitions, analysing landmark decisions including 
Tilokchand (supra), Rabindranath Bose (supra), and R.S Deodhar 
(supra). Echoing our observations above, it was noted that while the 
broad ratio in Tilokchand (supra) is that an Article 32 petition can 
be dismissed for delay, no clear majority view emerged on the exact 
parameters or standard for such dismissal.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
91
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
36.	 Crucially, this Court noted that the petitions were filed on behalf 
of a whole class of people, raised contentions regarding a severe 
violation of fundamental rights, particularly Articles 21 and 29 of the 
Constitution, respectively, and also dealt with an issue that was still 
very much playing out on the ground. Consequently, it was held that 
such a kind of petition could not be dismissed at the threshold on the 
ground of delay/laches, as doing so would mean that the Court would 
be guilty of ‘shrinking its constitutional duty’. This Court went further, 
noting that significant developments have occurred in the landscape 
of Indian constitutional jurisprudence since this Court’s decision in 
Tilokchand (supra). Consequently, according to the bench, the 
time had come for this Court to say that, at least when it comes to 
violations of the fundamental right to life and personal liberty, delay 
or laches, by itself, without more, would not be sufficient to shut the 
doors of the court on any petitioner. Regarding the constitutionality 
of Section 6-A, the court referred the matter to a Constitution Bench 
for adjudication. The relevant observations made by this Court are 
as follows: 
“21. Article 32 of the Constitution which has been described 
as the “heart and soul” of the Constitution guarantees 
the right to move the Supreme Court for the enforcement 
of all or any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part 
III of the Constitution. This Article is, therefore, itself a 
fundamental right and it is in this backdrop that we need 
to address the preliminary submission. 
xxx
27. In Express Publications (Madurai) Ltd. v. Union of 
India [(2004) 11 SCC 526 : 2005 SCC (L&S) 99] , the 
employer newspaper wished to challenge paragraph 80 
of the Employees’ Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, which 
came into force in 1956. The challenge was made in a writ 
petition under Article 32, 45 years later in 2001. This was 
turned down by a Bench of two Judges with a caveat, that 
if it was the case of the petitioners that with the passage 
of time, a certain provision had become unconstitutional, 
then obviously the very passage of time would not amount 
to delay for which a writ petition would not be entertained.

92
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
28. Similarly in Tridip Kumar Dingal v. State of W.B. [(2009) 
1 SCC 768 : (2009) 2 SCC (L&S) 119] , a Bench of two 
Judges held that there is no upper and no lower limit 
when it comes to an Article 32 petition. It all depends on 
the breach of the particular fundamental right, the remedy 
claimed, and how the delay arose. On facts, the petition 
was turned down as there was an unexplained delay of 
ten years.
29. In Bangalore City Coop. Housing Society Ltd. v. State 
of Karnataka, a two Judge Bench of this Court understood 
the ratio of Tilokchand Motichand as follows:
“[...]
48. The ratio of the aforesaid decision is that 
even though there is no period of limitation for 
filing petitions under Articles 32 and 226 of the 
Constitution, the petitioner should approach the 
Court without loss of time and if there is delay, 
then cogent explanation should be offered for 
the same. However, no hard-and-fast rule can 
be laid down or a straitjacket formula can be 
adopted for deciding whether or not this Court 
or the High Court should entertain a belated 
petition filed under Article 32 or Article 226 of 
the Constitution and each case must be decided 
on its own facts.”
30. It will be seen that, in the present case, the petitioners 
in the various writ petitions represent an entire People—the 
tribal and non-tribal population of the State of Assam. In 
their petition, they have raised a plea that the sovereignty 
and integrity of India is itself at stake as a massive influx of 
illegal migrants from a neighbouring country has affected 
this core Constitutional value. That, in fact, it has been held 
in Sonowal case that such an influx is “external aggression” 
within the meaning of Article 355 of the Constitution of India, 
and that the Central Government has done precious little 
to stem this tide thereby resulting in a violation of Article 
355. As a result of this huge influx, periodic clashes have 
been taking place between the citizens of India and these 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
93
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
migrants resulting into loss of life and property, sounding 
in a violation of Articles 21 and 29 of the Constitution of 
the Assamese people as a whole. Not only is there an 
assault on the life of the citizenry of the State of Assam 
but there is an assault on their way of life as well. The 
culture of an entire People is being eroded in such a way 
that they will ultimately be swamped by persons who have 
no right to continue to live in this country. The petitioners 
have also argued that this Hon’ble Court in Sonowal case 
[has specifically held in para 79 thereof that : (SCC p. 723)
“79. … Bangladeshi nationals who have illegally 
crossed the border and have trespassed into 
Assam or are living in other parts of the country 
have no legal right of any kind to remain in India 
and they are liable to be deported.”
They have also raised a fervent plea that Article 14 also 
continues to be violated as Section 6-A(3) to (5) are not 
time bound but are ongoing.
31. Given the contentions raised specifically with regard to 
pleas under Articles 21 and 29, of a whole class of People, 
namely, the tribal and non-tribal citizens of Assam and 
given the fact that agitations on this score are ongoing, 
we do not feel that petitions of this kind can be dismissed 
at the threshold on the ground of delay/laches. Indeed, 
if we were to do so, we would be guilty of shirking our 
Constitutional duty to protect the lives of our own citizens 
and their culture. In fact, the time has come to have a 
relook at the doctrine of laches altogether when it comes 
to violations of Articles 21 and 29.
32.Tilokchand Motichand is a judgment involving property 
rights of individuals. Ramchandra Deodhar case , also 
of a Constitution Bench of five judges has held that the 
fundamental right under Article 16 cannot be wished away 
solely on the ‘jejune’ ground of delay. Since Tilokchand 
Motichand case was decided, there have been important 
strides made in the law. Property Rights have been 
removed from part III of the Constitution altogether 
by the Constitution 44th Amendment Act. The same 

94
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
amendment made it clear that even during an emergency, 
the fundamental right under Article 21 can never be 
suspended, and amended Article 359(1) to give effect 
to this. In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India , decided 
nine years after Tilokchand Motichand , Article 21 has 
been given its new dimension, and pursuant to the new 
dimension a huge number of rights have come under the 
umbrella of Article 21 [for an enumeration of these rights, 
see Kapila Hingorani (1) v. State of Bihar, para 57]. Further, 
in Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corpn, it has now been 
conclusively held that all fundamental rights cannot be 
waived (at para 29). Given these important developments 
in the law, the time has come for this Court to say that 
at least when it comes to violations of the fundamental 
right to life and personal liberty, delay or laches by itself 
without more would not be sufficient to shut the doors of 
the court on any petitioner. “
(Emphasis Supplied)
37.	 In Citizenship Act, 1955, Section 6-A, reported in (2024) 16 
SCC 105, a Constitution Bench of this Court, of which one of us 
(J.B. Pardiwala, J.) was a member, addressed the constitutionality 
of Section 6A of the Citizenship Act, 1955, on reference from the 
decision in Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha (supra). Surya Kant, J 
(as he then was), in his leading opinion, dealt with the issue of 
whether the writ petitions were maintainable in view of the inordinate 
delay of 27 years. He noted that while the doctrine of laches and 
the Limitation Act, 1963 served similar underlying purposes, the 
difference lay in the fact that the doctrine of laches was not rigid in 
its application, as its application was evaluated on a case-by-case 
basis. Consequently, since the principle was not an inviolable legal 
rule, it allows the court to conduct individualised analyses and, in 
some circumstances, entertain the claims even when they may be 
delayed, and third-party interests or rights may have been created. 
38.	 According to Surya Kant, J., the claims affecting the public at large 
or claims challenging the vires of a statute vis-à-vis the Constitution 
are two such circumstances in which the doctrine of delay and 
laches would not be strictly applied. On the facts of the case, Surya 
Kant J held that both the aforesaid mitigating factors are met and 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
95
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
that the petitioners’ claims could not be dismissed at the threshold 
on the ground of laches. J.B. Pardiwala, J., in his separate opinion, 
concurred with the views expressed by Surya Kant, J., on the issue 
of delay and laches. The relevant observations made by Surya 
Kant, J., are as follows: 
“66. Hence, it is settled law that the doctrine of laches is 
not an inviolable legal rule but a rule of practice that must 
be supplemented with sound exercise of judicial discretion. 
While courts must ordinarily apply this doctrine in light of 
the policy reasons discussed before, the doctrine allows 
the Court to conduct an individualised analysis of each 
case and entertain claims in the competing interests of 
justice, even when the claim may be delayed and third-
party rights may have been created. 
67. We may, however, hasten to clarify that the doctrine of 
delay and laches is not to be ipso facto excluded where 
a breach of fundamental rights is alleged. The five-Judge 
Benches of this Court in Narayani Debi Khaitan v. State of 
Bihar , Daryao v. State of U.P. and Tilokchand Motichand , 
and a three-Judge Bench in Amrit Lal Berry v. CCE , have 
reiterated that even in such like cases the court must see 
the effect of laches. However, that being said, there may 
be instances where considerations of justice demand 
that the court adjudicate on the merits of a case rather 
than summarily dismissing it based solely on procedural 
grounds such as delay. 
68. One such factual circumstance is when the claim affects 
the public at large. In Kashinath G. Jalmi v. Speaker , this 
Court analysed several precedents (including Tilokchand 
Motichand ) and differentiated them by holding that the 
doctrine of laches cannot be used to expel a claim that 
is made on behalf of the public. Judicial discretion, while 
applying this doctrine, must always be governed by the 
objective of promoting the larger public interest; and if a 
claim affects the public at large, the Court should go into 
the merits of the case. Where it is found that denial of 
consideration on merits is likely to affect society in general 

96
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and can have a cascading effect on millions of citizens, the 
Court will carve out an exception and proceed to decide 
the lis on merits. 
69. Another vital circumstance where the doctrine of delay 
and laches would not be applicable strictly is in matters 
where the vires of a statute are challenged vis-à-vis the 
Constitution. This Court has, in the due course of time, 
accepted the idea of transformative constitutionalism, which 
conceptualises the Constitution not as a still document 
cast in stone at the day of its formation but as a living 
and dynamic body of law, capable of constant updation 
and evolution as per changing societal mores. Should 
this Court deny a constitutional challenge solely based 
on delay, it would effectively establish an arbitrary cut-off 
beyond which laws could no longer be re-examined in light 
of changing circumstances. Such a rigid approach cannot 
be countenanced as changing societal circumstances 
sometimes necessitate a reconsideration of the status 
quo  — even when the challenge is brought after a 
considerable lapse of time.
70. To instantiate, a Constitution Bench of this Court in 
Navtej Singh Johar v. Union of India , held Section 377 of 
the Penal Code, 1860 to be ultra vires of the Constitution, 
regardless of the fact that the provision was a part of the 
statute for over a century. The Court took note of the 
norms of contemporary society and declared them to be 
unconstitutional. If the doctrine of laches were to be applied 
strictly, time would run in favour of a constitutionally invalid 
statute, which cannot be allowed in the larger interests of 
justice and the transformative nature of the Constitution.
71. Adverting to the facts of the case, it seems that the 
two mitigating circumstances mentioned above are directly 
attracted. 
72. First, the petitioners have raised various substantial 
questions that affect the public at large, including the erosion 
of the culture of indigenous communities, discrimination 
against the State of Assam, and the larger perceived threat 
to the security of the country from immigration. Therefore, 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
97
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
instead of being an in personam dispute between two 
individuals, the questions raised by the petitioners directly 
or indirectly affect a large citizenry.
xxx
74. Second, since the controversy pertains to the 
constitutionality of a statutory provision, the doctrine of 
laches ought not to be applied strictly to bar the claim at the 
very threshold. As discussed in para 69, such constitutional 
adjudication cannot be made subject to any straitjacket rule 
of limitation. Challenges regarding the constitutionality of 
a statute require the Court to take a liberal approach and 
permit a certain amount of flexibility. A contrary approach 
would set a wrong precedent and act as a bar against 
challenging anachronistic laws that might no longer align 
with the ideals of constitutionalism. This would constitute 
an unsound legal principle since oppressive laws should 
not persist solely because they have been tolerated by 
society for a certain period.
xxx
78. To conclude, while there has undoubtedly been a 
considerable delay in filing the instant writ petitions, the 
doctrine of laches cannot be applied strictly to disbar the 
claims at the threshold. This is so because the present 
proceedings raise substantial questions that affect the 
public at large and the constitutional validity of a statutory 
provision. If we were to decide otherwise, we would be, 
in essence, creating an artificial deadline for important 
constitutional issues. This would give rise to an unfair 
principle of law in the realm of constitutional adjudication.”
(Emphasis Supplied)
(b)	 Principles Governing the Application of Delay and Laches 
to Article 32 Petitions
39.	 A cumulative reading of the aforementioned decisions makes it evident 
that, in the context of petitions under Article 32, the doctrine of laches 
operates as a flexible rule of practice rather than a rigid rule of law 

98
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to be mechanically applied. Its application is anchored in sound 
judicial discretion, moulded by the specific facts and circumstances 
of each case. This discretionary approach empowers the Court to 
perform a crucial balancing exercise by weighing the equity in not 
allowing stale claims against its paramount constitutional duty to 
enforce fundamental rights.
40.	 Furthermore, a conspectus of the above decisions demonstrates 
that whenever this Court has been called upon to apply the doctrine 
of laches, its inquiry has consistently been guided by three primary 
considerations: first, whether there has been an inordinate delay in 
approaching the Court; secondly, whether the petitioner has provided 
a cogent and satisfactory explanation for such delay; and thirdly, 
whether entertaining the belated claim would unsettle settled matters 
and prejudice third party rights by reopening matters long concluded.
41.	 It is important to clarify and emphasise that, when applying the 
doctrine of delay and laches, consideration should be given to the 
totality of the circumstances affecting both parties, rather than the 
mere fact of delay. As has been rightly held, the test is not as to 
the physical running of time.1 To apply the doctrine strictly based on 
the quantum of delay would fundamentally alter its core character, 
transforming it from a flexible, discretionary standard into a rigid rule. 
Such an approach would effectively convert the equitable doctrine 
into a rule of statutory limitation, a position contrary to the spirit of 
this Court’s decisions on this issue. 
42.	 When evaluating the totality of circumstances for applying the doctrine 
of delay and laches to an Article 32 petition, the pivotal considerations, 
as delineated above, are twofold: (i) whether entertaining the claim 
would unsettle concluded matters and prejudice third-party rights, 
and (ii) whether the petitioner has offered a cogent explanation for 
the delay. At this juncture, it is crucial to appreciate the interplay 
between these two factors. Frequently, when a party approaches 
this Court after a considerable hiatus, adjudicating the claim and 
granting the relief sought will inevitably unsettle, to some extent, 
existing arrangements and potentially impact third-party rights. 
1	
See ¶ 13, M/s Dehri Rotas Light Railway Company Limited v. District Board Bhojpur & Ors. (1992) 
2 SCC 598. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
99
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
43.	 If a rigidly conservative approach were adopted, the mere prospect 
of such disruption or unsettling of third-party rights would invariably 
lead to the dismissal of the petition at the threshold. Further, where 
the delay has been satisfactorily explained, demonstrating an absence 
of blameworthy conduct or negligence on the part of the petitioner, 
barring them from pursuing their fundamental rights at the threshold 
stage on the basis that it will affect third parties would be manifestly 
unjust, especially in the context of proceedings under Article 32. 
44.	 It is a well-settled proposition that the jurisdiction of this Court 
under Article 32 is expansive and is not confined to the issuance 
of traditional prerogative writs, but explicitly encompasses the 
power to issue any directions, orders, or writs appropriate for the 
enforcement of fundamental rights.2 This Court has repeatedly 
affirmed its constitutional mandate to develop new tools and devise 
innovative remedies to facilitate the enforcement of fundamental 
rights.3 Consequently, the mere possibility of the potential disruption 
that such relief might cause cannot serve as the sole bedrock for 
dismissing a petition at the threshold on the ground of laches. Where 
a petitioner furnishes a cogent explanation for the delay, the court is 
bound to examine the matter. If the court subsequently determines 
that the specific relief claimed is unfeasible or would unduly prejudice 
third-party rights, it would exercise its plenary powers to mould 
the relief in such a manner that disruption is minimised whilst still 
ensuring that the fundamental rights of the petitioner are enforced. 
45.	 Flowing from the aforesaid discussion, it is evident that the adequacy of 
the explanation for the delay constitutes the paramount consideration 
when determining whether an Article 32 petition ought to be dismissed 
on the ground of laches. Stated differently, the operative test is not 
one of ‘unreasonable delay’ but of ‘unexplained delay’. This principle 
is fortified by the fact that, even in instances where this Court has 
declined relief to prevent the disruption of crystallised third-party 
rights, such as in Aflatoon (supra) and others4, the foundational 
premise for dismissal was a petitioner’s failure to furnish a cogent 
and satisfactory explanation for the delay. 
2	
See ¶ 14, Rashid Ahmed v. Municipal Board, Kairana, 1950 SCC OnLine SC 16. 
3	
See ¶ 20, Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa & Ors. (1993) 2 SCC 746 & ¶ 13, Bandhua Mukti Morcha 
v. Union of India (1984) 3 SCC 161. 
4	
See ¶ 30, R.S. Makashi v. I.M. Menon (1982) 1 SCC 379 & ¶ 23-25, S.S. Moghe v. Union of India 
(1981) 3 SCC 271. 

100
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
46.	 This emphasis on the unexplained delay assumes a heightened 
significance in writ proceedings where the State is the respondent. 
Situations frequently arise, like in G.P. Doval (supra), where the delay 
in invoking Article 32 is at least in part attributable to the State’s own 
conduct, such as prolonged administrative indecision or inertia. In 
such scenarios, the State cannot be permitted to benefit from its own 
lethargy by weaponising the doctrine of laches against a petitioner, 
particularly when it itself has delayed taking a conclusive decision 
until matters had already attained artificial finality.5
47.	 The evolution of this Court’s application and reliance on the doctrine 
of laches suggests that the apprehensions articulated by Hegde, J., 
in his dissenting opinion in Tilokchand (supra) are, to a large extent, 
allayed. The Court has consistently held that the doctrine of laches 
should not be applied rigidly and that delay and laches cannot be 
valid defences in cases where circumstances exist which shock the 
judicial conscience of the Court or where the demand for justice 
is so compelling that a constitutional court ought to exercise its 
jurisdiction with a view to promoting justice. 6 Where the circumstances 
demanded, this Court has proceeded on the notion that there is no 
“limitation” to doing justice and that the need for finality must be 
balanced with the need to rectify injustice.7 Further, as observed in 
the decision in G.P. Doval (supra), this Court is not tethered to a 
purely technical approach to delay. It recognises that a petitioner’s 
inability to approach the court on time may be caused by genuine 
systemic and practical hardships, rather than mere negligence. 
48.	 The exposition by this Court in Assam Sanmilita Mahasangha 
(supra) and Section 6A - In Re (supra) further adds a new dimension 
to the issue of delay and laches in Article 32 petitions. By invoking 
the aspect of ‘public interest’, the Court has ensured that important 
public issues are not held to be beyond the purview of this court’s 
jurisdiction solely on the basis of the fact that there was a delay in 
bringing the same before the court. Further, by invoking the idea 
of transformative constitutionalism, the Court has upheld the view 
that the Constitution is a social document, whose principles and 
5	
See ¶ 17, Sukh Dutt Ratra & Anr. v. State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors. (2022) 7 SCC 508.
6	
See ¶ 12.12 & 12.13, Vidya Devi v. State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors. (2020) 2 SCC 569
7	
See ¶ 18, Sukh Dutt Ratra & Anr v. State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors. (2022) 7 SCC 508 & ¶ 51, 
Urban Improvement Trust v. Vidhya Devi & Ors., 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3725.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
101
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
ideals ought to be appreciated and applied dynamically, in line with 
the changing tides of society. Consequently, delay and laches may 
not be relevant factors where it is shown that an issue needs to be 
constitutionally reevaluated owing to the change in circumstances 
that has ensued. 
49.	 Another crucial facet of transformative constitutionalism, as heralded 
by this Court in Navtej Singh Johar & Ors v. Union of India, reported 
in (2018) 10 SCC 1, and Indian Young Lawyers Association & 
Ors v. State of Kerala & Ors, reported in (2019) 11 SCC 1, is the 
Constitution’s profound potential to address and correct historical 
wrongs. Historical injustices are often deeply entrenched in societal 
structures and arrangements, rendering them self-perpetuating across 
generations. Correcting such historical injustices forms the fulcrum 
of the Constitution, specifically Part III, which deals with fundamental 
rights. The emancipatory power of the Constitution lies precisely in its 
capacity to break these cycles. It requires constitutional provisions to 
be interpreted and applied in a manner that actively seeks to rectify 
these entrenched systemic inequities.
50.	 In this context, a rigid or mechanical application of the doctrine of 
delay and laches could inadvertently serve to perpetuate historical 
wrongs, effectively denying access to justice and shielding systemic 
inequities behind procedural barriers. However, as our preceding 
analysis demonstrates, this Court’s jurisprudence is sufficiently robust 
to prevent such an outcome. The flexible, context-specific approach to 
laches ensures that the historical realities and practical impediments 
faced by litigants are duly accounted for. Consequently, any attempt 
to invoke delay as a procedural shield to insulate historical injustices 
from judicial scrutiny would likely fail.
51.	 When this Court is confronted with claims that are inextricably linked 
to notions of historical wrong or systemic injustice, the judicial scales 
must largely tilt in favour of granting access to the court. The ultimate 
adjudication on the merits may or may not find the substantive law to 
be in favour of a petitioner. However, the very act of allowing these 
claims to be heard and deliberated upon is an essential aspect of 
constitutional recognition. It ensures that the procedural threshold 
of laches does not become an insurmountable wall. 
52.	 Such ideals of constitutionalism are further enabled by Article 32, 
which imposes a duty and a privilege on this Court to enforce 

102
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution. At this juncture, it 
is apposite to refer to the following observation made by this Court 
in Daryao & Ors v. State of U.P. & Ors., reported in 1961 SCC 
OnLine SC 21:
“8. There can be no doubt that the fundamental right 
guaranteed by Article 32(1) is a very important safeguard 
for the protection of the fundamental rights of the citizens, 
and as a result of the said guarantee this Court has been 
entrusted with the solemn task of upholding the fundamental 
rights of the citizens of this country. The fundamental rights 
are intended not only to protect individual’s rights but they 
are based on high public policy. Liberty of the individual 
and the protection of his fundamental rights are the very 
essence of the democratic way of life adopted by the 
Constitution, and it is the privilege and the duty of this Court 
to uphold those rights. This Court would naturally refuse 
to circumscribe them or to curtail them except as provided 
by the Constitution itself. It is because of this aspect of 
the matter that in Romesh Thappar v. State of Madras in 
the very first year after the Constitution came into force, 
this Court rejected a preliminary objection raised against 
the competence of a petition filed under Article 32 on the 
ground that as a matter of orderly procedure the petitioner 
should first have resorted to the High Court under Article 
226, and observed that “this Court is thus constituted the 
protector and guarantor of the fundamental rights, and it 
cannot, consistently with the responsibility so laid upon it, 
refuse to entertain applications seeking protection against 
infringements of such rights”. [...]”
(Emphasis Supplied)
53.	 On similar lines, this Court in Prem Chand Garg & Anr v. The 
Excise Commissioner, U.P & Ors, reported in 1962 SCC OnLine 
SC 37, observed as follows: 
“2. [...]The fundamental right to move this Court can, 
therefore, be appropriately described as the corner-stone 
of the democratic edifice raised by the Constitution. That 
is why it is natural that this Court should, in the words 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
103
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
of Patanjali Sastri J., regard itself “as the protector and 
guarantor of fundamental rights,” and should declare that 
“it cannot, consistently with the responsibility laid upon it, 
refuse to entertain applications seeking protection against 
infringements of such rights.” In discharging the duties 
assigned to it, this Court has to play the role “of a sentinel 
on the qui vive” and it must always regard it as its solemn 
duty to protect the said fundamental rights’ zealously and 
vigilantly. [...]”
(Emphasis Supplied)
54.	 The overarching discourse on the doctrine of delay and laches 
becomes crystal clear when situated within the broader context of 
this Court’s constitutional duty and privilege under Article 32, as 
clearly enunciated in Daryao (supra) and Prem Chand (supra). 
This Court has consciously evolved the equitable doctrine of laches 
to ensure that it in no manner circumscribes or dilutes the solemn 
constitutional responsibility vested in it. A strict, mechanical application 
of delay would invariably lead to the dismissal of petitions at the very 
threshold, precluding any substantive adjudication of the fundamental 
rights claims advanced. Such an approach would be fundamentally 
antithetical to this Court’s role as the protector and guarantor of 
fundamental rights and would effectively shrink the profound duty 
and privilege entrusted to this Court. 
(c)	 Application to the facts of this matter
55.	 Adverting to the factual matrix of the present case, a prima facie 
assessment might suggest that the present writ petition is barred 
by the doctrine of laches. Undeniably, there has been an inordinate 
delay of nearly six decades, given that the impugned notification was 
issued in the year 1955 and the present petition was instituted only 
in the year 2014. Furthermore, adjudicating the claims raised herein 
would inevitably necessitate reopening historical legal settlements that 
have long attained finality. However, as delineated in the preceding 
analysis, the mere quantum of delay or the prospect of disruption 
cannot be considered as sufficient reasons in themselves to bar a 
petition under Article 32. What is important is to gauge if the petitioner 
has a cogent explanation for the delay.

104
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
56.	 It stands to reason that an inordinate delay spanning six decades 
is rarely attributable to a solitary cause. The present factual matrix 
is no exception. To explain its prolonged absence from this Court, 
the petitioner has placed reliance on a confluence of mitigating 
circumstances.
57.	 One mitigating factor is the region’s unique and tumultuous historical 
trajectory. In the decades immediately following Independence, the 
administrative and constitutional status of the area was in a state 
of continuous evolution. Originally administered as the Lushai Hills 
district within the State of Assam, the region was subsequently 
reorganised into the Union Territory of Mizoram under the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971, before finally attaining 
full statehood in 1987. This period was simultaneously marked by 
significant political upheaval spanning nearly two decades in the 
form of an insurgency. Viewed cumulatively, these background 
conditions would have presented formidable practical hurdles. 
In such a climate of acute political unrest and chaos, claims for 
compensation and historical land rights are inevitably relegated 
to the periphery, making it exceptionally difficult for Mizo Chiefs to 
secure meaningful engagement with their grievances, especially 
within political circles. 
58.	 Another mitigating circumstance is the Mizo Chiefs’ continuous 
agitation of their claims before various forums. The material on record 
evidences a pursuit of their grievances, thereby dispelling the notion 
that the chiefs were indolent or slumbering over their rights. We are, 
however, mindful that the mere filing of successive representations 
to the authorities, particularly after previous representations have 
been rejected or a reasonable period has elapsed, does not furnish 
a valid explanation to surmount the bar of laches.8
59.	 In the present factual matrix, while it might be contended that the 
chiefs persisted with administrative representations for a prolonged 
duration, a crucial factor warrants specific attention. On multiple 
occasions, respondent no. 2 (the State of Mizoram) conducted itself 
in a manner that engendered a legitimate expectation amongst the 
8	
See ¶ 5-7, State of Orissa v. Pyarimohan Samantaray & Ors. (1977) 3 SCC 396 & ¶ 6-10 & Karnataka 
Power Corpn. Ltd. v. K. Thangappan (2006) 4 SCC 322. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
105
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
chiefs that an amicable resolution was imminent, thereby obviating the 
immediate need for adversarial litigation. Evidence of such conduct 
is reflected in the official assurances tendered by the State before 
the Gauhati High Court, at a time when the chiefs were actively 
agitating for their rights. To substantiate, it would do well to look at 
the circumstances in which the writ appeals being pursued by the 
chiefs in the Gauhati High Court came to be disposed of: 
a.	
In Writ Appeal No. 69 of 1998, the Counsel for the State of 
Mizoram submitted that the government is considering the claim 
for compensation and that a suitable order would be passed 
shortly, in consultation with the Union of India. In lieu of this 
statement, the counsel for the chiefs did not press the issue 
further. Consequently, the High Court disposed of the matter with 
the observation and direction that the government of Mizoram 
would consider the claim of the village chief, in consultation 
with the Union of India, expeditiously and preferably within 
three months. If the chiefs were not satisfied with the order, 
they were entitled to seek redressal of their grievances before 
an appropriate forum 
b.	
Thereafter, in Writ Appeal No. 598 of 2005, once again, the 
Counsel for the State of Mizoram stated that the claim as 
espoused by the chiefs would be adjudicated afresh by the 
State in accordance with law. Consequently, the High Court 
closed the writ appeal with the direction to the government 
of Mizoram to consider the claim of the chiefs afresh. In the 
event the chiefs felt aggrieved by the decision taken by the 
government of Mizoram, it was left open for them to pursue 
such remedy as may be available under law. 
60.	 Further fortifying this expectation is the fact that the Chief Minister 
of Mizoram, on at least two distinct occasions, addressed formal 
communications to the Prime Minister of India, espousing the chiefs’ 
claims for compensation. It is necessary to clarify that this Court does 
not construe such intergovernmental correspondence as constituting 
promissory estoppel against the State, being acutely aware that 
political communications often carry dimensions beyond the purview 
of judicial consideration. Nevertheless, these communications are 
pertinent to the extent that they signalled a sympathetic stance 
towards the chiefs’ grievances. Such conduct could reasonably have 

106
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
led the chiefs to hope that a resolution was forthcoming, thereby 
dissuading them from initiating litigation.9
61.	 Weighing the totality of these circumstances, this Court is conscious 
of the fact that the delay herein is undeniably inordinate, and 
the explanation offered by the petitioner is, strictly speaking, not 
unequivocally convincing. Nevertheless, we are not inclined to 
dismiss this petition at the threshold solely on the ground of delay. It 
is evident from the record that the State of Mizoram (respondent no.2) 
has held out hope for an amicable settlement and never outrightly 
rejected the grievances of the chiefs. It is this unique combination, 
the continuous representations made by the chiefs coupled with the 
State’s supportive stance, that understandably pushed the chiefs to 
seek an administrative resolution rather than immediately pursuing 
legal remedies. Equally significant is that, on two prior occasions 
when the chiefs approached the High Court, the matter was not 
adjudicated on the merits. Instead, owing to the ongoing dialogue 
between the parties, the High Court left the avenue open for the 
chiefs to pursue appropriate legal remedies in the future. To shut 
the doors on them at this third instance, without ever examining the 
substance of their claims, would be highly unjust.
(II)	 Whether any fundamental rights of the Mizo Chiefs were 
violated?
62.	 It is well settled that, for relief to be granted in a writ petition under 
Article 32, a case must be made out establishing the existence of a 
fundamental right and its breach, actual or threatened. 
63.	 Right to property was earlier enshrined in Articles 19(1)(f) and 31 
of the Constitution. It may be noted that both these provisions were 
repealed by the Constitution (Forty-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978. 
However, the 44th Amendment is prospective in its operation, and all 
laws passed and executive action taken prior to 20th June 1979 will 
continue to be judged by and be subject to the provisions of Part 
III, including Articles 19(1)(f) and 31. 
64.	 Article 19(1)(f) guaranteed to the Indian citizens a right to acquire, 
hold, and dispose of property. Article 19(5), however, permitted the 
9	
See ¶ 21, P.C. Sethi v. Union of India (1975) 4 SCC 67 & ¶ 16, Purshottam Lal v. Union of India 
(1973) 1 SCC 651.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
107
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
State to impose by law reasonable restrictions on this right in the 
interests of the general public or for the protection of the interests 
of any Scheduled Tribe. Article 31(1) laid down that no person could 
be deprived of his property without the authority of law. Article 31(2), 
on the other hand, underwent significant change and was the focal 
point of multiple constitutional amendments. Article 31(2) as it stood 
when it was originally enacted and Article 31(2) as it stood before 
its abrogation in 1978, are reproduced below: 
“Article 31(2) at the time of enactment of the Indian 
Constitution 
No property, movable or immovable, including any 
interest in, or in any company owning, any commercial 
or industrial undertaking, shall be taken possession 
of or acquired for public purposes under any law 
authorising the taking of such possession or such 
acquisition, unless the law provides for compensation 
for the property taken possession of or acquired 
and either fixes the amount of the compensation, or 
specifies the principles on which, and the manner 
in which, the compensation is to be determined and 
given.
Article 31(2) as it stood before its abrogation in 1978 
No property shall be compulsorily acquired or 
requisitioned save for a public purpose and save by 
authority of a law which provides for acquisition or 
requisitioning of the property for an amount which may 
be fixed by such law or which may be determined in 
accordance with such principles and given in such 
manner as may be specified in such law, and no 
such law shall be called in question in any court on 
the ground that the amount so fixed or determined 
is not adequate or that the whole or any part of such 
amount is to be given otherwise than in cash.”
65.	 In the present case, the central dispute concerns the alleged violation 
of the Mizo Chiefs’ right to property, as guaranteed under Articles 
19(1)(f) and 31 of the Constitution, respectively. The petitioner claims 
this right was breached either because the Mizo Chiefs were deprived 

108
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of their lands without lawful authority, or because the compensation 
paid to them was wholly ‘illusory’. Given that the impugned actions of 
the respondents occurred at a time when the right to property was a 
fundamental right under Part III, and considering that the Constitution 
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, operates only prospectively, 
the right to property was firmly in existence at the relevant time. 
Consequently, the existence of a fundamental right, as is required 
for invoking and claiming relief under Article 32, stands satisfied. 
66.	 It is established that who bears the burden of proof in cases where 
fundamental rights violations are alleged depends on the fundamental 
right alleged to have been violated. The same burden of proof rule will 
not apply to all fundamental rights violation challenges.10 However, in 
cases such as the present one, the initial burden is on the petitioner 
to satisfy the Court and make out a case for an invasion of their 
fundamental right(s).11
67.	 To discharge this initial burden and successfully establish a violation 
of their fundamental right to property, the petitioner must necessarily 
succeed on two distinct fronts. First and foremost, it must prove a 
clear title of the Mizo Chiefs over the subject lands, which, in the 
context of its sweeping claim, effectively encompasses the entire 
territorial expanse of the present-day State of Mizoram.12 To establish 
such a title, the petitioner must conclusively demonstrate that, under 
the chieftainship system, as it operated during the British regime, 
the Mizo Chiefs held complete ownership of the land, rather than 
merely functioning as local administrative heads. Secondly, and only 
upon proving the ownership as aforesaid, the petitioner must satisfy 
the other parameters under Article 31. This includes, amongst other 
things, proving that the respondents deprived the chiefs of their 
property without lawful authority, or that the property was acquired 
without providing due compensation.
68.	 In an effort to discharge the burden of establishing title to the land, 
the petitioners have primarily relied on accounts and writings of 
scholars and officials of the British government. Upon a meticulous 
10	
See ¶ 15-29, Deena & Ors. v. Union of India (1983) 4 SCC 645.
11	
See ¶ 5, A. Hamsaveni & Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr. (1994) 6 SCC 51.
12	
See ¶ 4, Bokaro and Ramgur Ltd. v. State of Bihar, 1962 SCC OnLine SC 379.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
109
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
perusal of the said material, it is, at the very outset, highly ambiguous 
whether these texts unequivocally recognise the Mizo Chiefs as the 
absolute owners of the land. Furthermore, even assuming that such 
an interpretation could be culled from these writings, the petitioners 
have advanced no compelling justification as to why such writings and 
accounts should be elevated to the status of conclusive evidentiary 
proof. It is legally untenable for this Court to rest a decision of such 
magnitude on the fragile foundation of such flimsy submissions and 
woefully inadequate proof.
69.	 The material adduced by the respondent, at least on a prima facie 
examination, indicates that during the British administration of the 
Lushai Hills district, the title over the land never vested in the Chiefs. 
Furthermore, the record before us is bereft of any comprehensive 
compilation or analysis of the boundary papers issued to the Chiefs, 
nor is it established that these documents were uniform in their 
conferment of rights and duties. However, an examination of the 
boundary paper available on record entirely belies the petitioner’s 
claim, as nothing therein even remotely suggests the conferment 
or recognition of absolute ownership of land. Consequently, we 
are constrained to hold that the petitioners have woefully failed to 
discharge their burden of proving title over the subject lands.
70.	 We are cognisant that, unlike in modern times, establishing land 
title from the pre-independence era, especially within a traditional 
chieftainship system, rarely involves a neat or conclusive paper trail. 
However, given the sheer magnitude of the petitioner’s claims, it is 
only reasonable to expect a much deeper historical investigation on 
its part. To substantiate such an extravagant demand, the petitioner 
ought to have relied on alternative sources of evidence, such as 
government documents, official notifications, and administrative 
orders, to build a coherent understanding of their alleged title. Both 
sides have failed to present a continuous, documented chain of 
events that would clearly map out the status of the land at different 
periods. 
71.	 Furthermore, the constitutional jurisprudence governing the right 
to property, particularly under the erstwhile Article 31, is deeply 
intricate and has been the subject of extensive judicial exposition. 
Consequently, apart from establishing ownership, there are other 

110
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
aspects to the right to property that the petitioner had to prove 
thoroughly. For instance, while the petitioner baldly asserts that 
the statutory compensation disbursed to the Mizo Chiefs was 
‘illusory’, they have entirely failed to traverse the plethora of legal 
precedents rendered by this Court that delineate the parameters for 
determining when compensation becomes legally illusory. Moreover, 
the pleadings are silent on how this specific claim interacts with the 
broader constitutional framework of property rights under Part III, or 
on how it reconciles with other legislation in force in the then State 
of Assam. In essence, the petitioner has approached a profoundly 
complex legal issue in a simplistic and superficial manner.
72.	 The petitioner has further advanced a plea of discrimination, 
contending that the Mizo Chiefs stood on an equal historical footing 
with the rulers of the erstwhile Princely States. They argue that the 
State’s failure to grant them comparable compensation or privy 
purses is manifestly arbitrary and violative of their fundamental rights. 
However, this assertion, much like its above claims, is entirely devoid 
of any legal basis and thereby merits outright rejection. The privy 
purses and other privileges granted to the erstwhile rulers of the 
Princely States were the direct outcome of specific, pre-constitutional 
political and contractual arrangements negotiated between those 
rulers and the Government. Consequently, it would be legally flawed 
to equate and elevate these entitlements to the status of a right, 
which all erstwhile rulers were constitutionally bestowed upon. Such 
political arrangements cannot be claimed as a matter of a legally 
enforceable right, much less a fundamental right. 
73.	 The petitioner has also contended that the State of Assam (the 
parent State in 1954) lacked legislative jurisdiction to enact the Act, 
1954. However, as the petitioner has not discharged its burden of 
establishing any violation of the fundamental rights of the chiefs, we 
do not deem it necessary to address the vires of the Act, 1954 or 
the legality of the impugned notification in this present writ petition. 
74.	 Therefore, having considered the matter from all vantage points, the 
inescapable conclusion is that the petitioner has not been able to 
establish any violation of the fundamental rights of the Mizo Chiefs 
in the present matter. Consequently, the petitioner is not entitled to 
any of the reliefs sought herein.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
111
Mizo Chief Council Mizoram, Thr, President Shri L. Chinzah v. 
Union of India & Ors.
75.	 For all the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is accordingly 
dismissed. 
76.	 Pending applications, if any, shall also stand dismissed.
Result of the case: Writ Petition Dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
