[2026] 3 S.C.R. 68 : 2026 INSC 142
K. Rajaiah
v.
The High Court for the State of Telangana
(Civil Appeal No. 1560 of 2026)
11 February 2026
[K.V. Viswanathan* and Vipul M. Pancholi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the appellant made out a case for interference 
with the order passed in the disciplinary proceedings, as upheld 
by the High Court.
Headnotes†
Service law – Dismissal from service – Fabrication of 
documents – Appellant-court attender remained absent from 
his duties, and subsequently produced handwritten medical 
certificate issued by a doctor – Doctor on verification denied 
having issued the medical certificate, though admitted that 
the appellant had approached him and received some tablets 
but he did not remember the date of treatment – Charges of 
misconduct proved in the disciplinary proceedings and the 
appellant was dismissed from service, later upheld in the 
departmental appeal – High Court also upheld the order of 
dismissal – Correctness:
Held: Parameters for judicial review against orders passed in 
disciplinary proceedings are limited – However, where the findings 
are based on no evidence a court of law perfectly justified in 
interfering with the orders in disciplinary proceedings – Having failed 
to verify the disputed and the undisputed signature, the finding of 
the Inquiry Officer that the medical certificate was not genuine, 
is perverse and based on no credible evidence – Signature on 
the Medical Certificate also not identical though broadly similar 
to what is in the acknowledgement and on the statement given 
by the doctor to the Presiding Judge – When nothing conclusive 
emerges one way or the other, prudence would dictate and common 
sense would command that the inquiry officer referred the matter 
* Author

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
69
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
to a handwriting expert, before recording a finding of fabrication 
and forgery – Failure to do so on facts, constrains to hold that the 
charge of forgery not been proved – Also there are many other 
inexplicable peculiarities in the case – Appellant was facing a grave 
charge of fabrication of the documents – When charges are grave, 
the caution and circumspection that should be exercised by the 
authorities should be greater – Charge in the present disciplinary 
inquiry, being not established, can have no bearing – Equally, 
the submission that the rules provided for a mandatory penalty 
of dismissal also does not require further consideration since 
the charges themselves have not been established – Impugned 
judgment of the High Court set aside – Order of dismissal and the 
order of the Appellate Authority dismissing the appeal set aside – 
Appellant to be reinstated in service forthwith with all consequential 
benefits. [Paras 36, 41, 43-45]
Case Law Cited
V.M. Saudagar (Dead) through Legal Heirs v. Divisional Commercial 
Manager, Central Railway and Another, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 
2277; Sawai Singh v. State of Rajasthan [1986] 2 SCR 957 : 
(1986) 3 SCC 454; Nirbhay Singh Suliya v. State of Madhya 
Pradesh and Another [2026] 1 SCR 91 : 2026 SCC OnLine 
SC 8 – referred to.
List of Acts
Central Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 
1965.
List of Keywords
Disciplinary proceedings; Inquiry Officer; Medical Certificate; 
Disputed writing in Medical Certificate; Dismissal from service; 
Handwritten medical certificate; Misconduct; Departmental appeal.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1560 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.02.2024 of the High Court 
for The State of Telangana at Hyderabad in WP No. 40486 of 2022

70
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Pratap Narayan Sanghi, Sr. Adv., Avadesh Narayan Sanghi, Sumit 
Kumar, Akhilesh Loya, Krishna Kumar Singh.
Adv. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Sindoora Vnl.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the judgment 
of the Division Bench of the High Court for the State of Telangana 
at Hyderabad dated 12.02.2024 in Writ Petition No.40486 of 2022. 
By the said judgment, the High Court dismissed the Writ Petition of 
the appellant and confirmed the order of his dismissal from service.
FACTS OF THE CASE:-
3.	
The appellant was recruited as an attender in the Court of Additional 
Senior Civil Judge, Karimnagar on 09.11.1998. According to the 
appellant, since he was indisposed with high fever, vomiting and 
motion from 03.08.2017 to 07.08.2017, he telephonically informed 
about his absence to the Office Superintendent.
4.	
The Additional Senior Civil Judge, Karimnagar, by a letter dated 
05.08.2017, wrote to the Principal District & Sessions Judge, 
Karimnagar, stating that the appellant was unauthorizedly absent 
from 03.08.2017 to 05.08.2017; that he had not applied for any 
kind of leave; that his unauthorized absence caused inconvenience 
to the Court and that the Court was not able to function properly. 
It was requested that action be taken against the individual for his 
unauthorized absence.
5.	
On 07.08.2017, the Principal District & Sessions Judge, Karimnagar, 
instructed the Additional Senior Civil Judge, Karimnagar, to initiate 
action as per the CCA Rules against the appellant and submit 
compliance report.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
71
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
6.	
On 09.08.2017, an explanation was called for from the appellant. On 
22.08.2017, the appellant furnished his explanation stating that on 
03.08.2017, he had high fever, vomiting and motion and he consulted 
one Dr. Bommaraveni Swamy Mudiraj, a Medical Practitioner at 
Manakondur, who treated him and advised him to be admitted in the 
hospital; that he was admitted in the said hospital from 03.08.2017 
to 07.08.2017 and submitted a certificate issued by the doctor. He 
stated that since he was unable to move, he informed the office over 
telephone on 03.08.2017 and prayed for mercy by dropping action 
against him. Thereafter, he applied for grant of casual leave from 
03.08.2017 to 05.08.2017 (both days inclusive) and 07.08.2017 and 
with permission to avail public holiday for 06.08.2017. 
7.	
It transpires from the record that after submission of the explanation 
and the medical certificate, the appellant requested the Presiding 
Officer of the Court to drop further proceedings, and the Presiding 
Officer kept the file aside and orally stated to the appellant not to 
repeat the same in future. The salary for the period of absence was 
deducted.
8.	
It further transpires from the record that in October, 2017, since the 
appellant failed to attend office for 2-3 days, the Presiding Officer of 
the Court decided to get a notice issued to Dr. Bommaraveni, whose 
purported certificate was produced by the appellant in August, 2017. 
It is not clear from the record whether the absence in October, 2017 
was also unauthorized since there is no such recording. Nothing is 
on record to show as to whether any action was taken against the 
appellant for absence in October, 2017. The absence in October, 
2017 appears to have acted as a trigger to summon the doctor. 
9.	
On 26.10.2017, after a gap of two months, an explanation was called 
for from Dr. Bommaraveni by the Additional Senior Civil Judge, 
Karimnagar to answer whether the admission slip was issued from 
the clinic of the said doctor and, if issued, to appear on 28.10.2017 
with complete record of treatment offered to the appellant for the 
period from 03.08.2017 to 07.08.2017. The doctor was informed that 
failure to do so would entail proceedings as per rules. Along with 
the notice calling for explanation, the document which the appellant 
claimed was the prescription issued by the doctor was annexed. 
One Sh. Devaraj, Police Constable, Manakondur P.S. was directed 
to cause service of notice on the doctor.

72
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
10.	 On 28.10.2017, Dr. Bommaraveni appeared and gave a statement 
to the effect that the medical certificate in question was not issued 
by him; that he was not authorized to issue such Medical Certificate 
certifying admission of the patient and that he has no nursing home 
to admit patients. He further added that the Medical Certificate might 
have been fabricated by using his old letter pad. 
11.	 In this statement, Dr. Bommaraveni did not state about the appellant 
having consulted him and receiving some tablets. This is significant 
because in the enquiry proceedings when he was examined as 
PW-2, Dr. Bommaraveni did admit that the appellant approached him 
and received some tablets though he did not remember the date on 
which the appellant approached him. 
12.	 On 15.12.2017, the Additional Senior Civil Judge, Karimnagar, wrote 
to the Principal District & Sessions Judge, Karimnagar, setting out 
the entire background and requested that necessary action be taken 
against the appellant. On 03.03.2018, the appellant was served with 
the Statement of imputation of misconduct and the Articles of charge. 
13.	 The Statement of imputation sets out that the appellant, in spite of 
his explanation being sought, did not submit his explanation resulting 
in the deduction of salary for the said period from 03.08.2017 to 
07.08.2017 and that the Medical Certificate was submitted only on 
22.08.2017. The other background facts were also set out and the 
following charges were framed and served on the appellant:-
“ARTICLE-I:-
That you, Sri K. Rajaiah, Office Subordinate, Court of 
the Addl. Senior Civil Judge, Karimnagar have remained 
absent from attending duty from 3.8.2017 to 7.8.2017 
and it is without applying casual leave or without prior 
permission of the Officer and it is intentionally, thereby 
causing much inconvenience to the day to day office work 
and in spite of giving explanation memo, you did not submit 
any explanation within the stipulated time, which shows 
your gross negligence and dereliction of duties and such 
behaviour is of (sic.) unbecoming of a Government servant 
much less in Judicial Department, which also amounts to 
misconduct and that you behaved in a derogative manner 
and you thereby liable for punishment under Rule 20 of 
the APCS (CC&A) Rules, 1991.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
73
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
ARTICLE – II:-
That you, Sri K. Rajaiah, Office Subordinate, Court of 
the Addl. Senior Civil Judge, Karimnagar have submitted 
explanation on 22.08.2017 with a fabricated Medical 
Certificate of Bommanaveni Swamy, Medical Practitioner 
stating that you have taken treatment with him, which shows 
your gross mischief towards the Court and such behaviour 
is of unbecoming of a Government servant much less in 
Judicial Department, which also amounts to misconduct 
and that you behaved in a derogative manner and you 
thereby liable for punishment under Rule 20 of the APCS 
(CC&A) Rules, 1991.”
14.	 At the enquiry, the appellant though requested for the services of 
a lawyer, the same was denied on the ground that the Presenting 
Officer was not a legal practitioner. However, permission was 
accorded to take the assistance of any other government servant 
as per Rule 20(5)(d) of the CCA Rules. From the counter affidavit 
of the respondent, it emerges that the appellant told the Inquiry 
Officer that he would cross-examine the witnesses himself and will 
not take the assistance of anyone since no one was ready to come 
forward to help him.
15.	 During the enquiry, the Presenting Officer examined four witnesses. 
PW-1 – V. Radha Krishna Sharma was the Office Superintendent. 
He deposed that the salary for the period of absence of the appellant 
was deducted on the direction of the Presiding Judge of the Court. 
The same was recorded in a note (Ex. P-4) and communicated to 
the appellant. He further deposed to the effect that after the appellant 
submitted his explanation on 22.08.2017 and on the request of the 
appellant to drop further proceedings, the Presiding Officer of the 
Court kept the file aside and orally stated to the appellant not to 
repeat the same in future. PW-1 deposed that in October, 2017 the 
appellant did not attend the office for two days. As explained earlier, 
there is nothing on record to show that the absence in October, 
2017 was unauthorized nor was this part of the present disciplinary 
proceedings.
16.	 However, what PW-1 further deposed is crucial. It was stated by 
PW-1 that the Presiding Officer directed him to issue notice to 
Dr. Bommaraveni, who was purported to have issued the Medical 

74
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Certificate (Ex. P-7). The doctor appeared before the Presiding 
Officer on 28.10.2017 and gave the following statement (Ex. P-9): -
“STATEMENT OF DR. BOMMARAVENI SWAMY 
MUDIRAJ, MEDICAL PRACTITIONER
I have received notice from Hon’ble Additional Senior 
Civil Judge, Karimnagar to appear before the court on 
28-10-2017 at 10:30 Am, accordingly, I attended before 
the court. The Medical Certificate dated 07-08-2017 
bearing the name of SAI TEJA CLINIC was confronted 
to me. I further submit that the said medical certificate 
is not Issued by me. I am not authorized to issue such 
Medical Certificate certifying the admission of patient as 
In-Patient. In fact, I have no Nursing Home’ to join patients. 
The Medical Certificate might have been fabricated by 
my old letter pad.
Sd/- 
DR. BOMMARAVENI SWAMY MUDIRAJ 
MEDICAL PRACTITIONER”
17.	 PW-1 further deposed that when he approached the Presiding 
Officer with a query as to whether pay bill of the appellant had to 
be prepared, the Presiding Officer addressed a letter to the Principal 
District and Sessions Judge, which ultimately resulted in the show 
cause notice of 08.02.2018 to the appellant and the initiation of the 
disciplinary proceedings. He further deposed that he did not receive 
any intimation from the appellant on 03.08.2017 and that he did not 
remember whether he received any phone call in the morning from 
the appellant with the intimation that the appellant was not feeling 
well with a request to convey the same to the Presiding Officer.
18.	 Dr. Bommaraveni was examined as PW-2 before the Inquiry Officer. 
His deposition is crucial. We are conscious of the fact that we 
are in a judicial review proceeding against the orders passed in a 
disciplinary enquiry. We are setting out the deposition only to take 
the deposition as it is and to see whether the charge against the 
appellant stood proved. What is crucial to notice in the deposition of 
the doctor is his admission that the appellant did approach him and 
receive tablets, though he does not remember the date on which 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
75
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
the appellant approached him. The doctor, however, denied having 
issued the Medical Certificate (Ex. P-7). The deposition is in the 
following terms: -
“I am practicing as R.M.P doctor at Manakondur from past 
3 years. I have not issued Ex.P7 i.e., medical certificate 
dated 07-08-2017 in the name of K.Rajaiah. I am not 
authorized to admit the patients as in patients in my clinic. 
I own Sai Teja Clinic at Manakondur. The medical shop 
owners will provide us the letter heads and the letter 
head of Ex.P7 is one of such and I have not issued the 
same. Witness is confronted with EX.P7 and witness says 
that the signature on Ex.P7 is not of him. Once in another 
Court the Officer called me and recorded my statement in 
respect of Ex.P7. Once K.Rajaiah approached me and 
received some tablets I do not remember the date on 
which K.Rajaiah approached me. Somebody took away 
blank letter head of mine and fabricated Ex.P7. But I 
have not issued Ex.P7 to K.Rajaiah at any point of time.
Cross examination by Sri K. Rajaiah (party in person):-
It is not true to suggest that the handwriting on Ex.P7 
is mine and I issued Ex.P7 to K.Rajaiah and now I am 
deposing false. Witness is confronted with Ex.P7 and 
P9 and posed a question stating that the signature on 
Ex.P7 and P9 pertaining to witness is one and the same. 
The witness stated that the signature on Ex.P9 is of 
him and signature on Ex.P7 do not pertains to him. It 
is not true to suggest that as K.Rajaiah is illiterate he 
cannot read and write and Ex.P7 was issued by me 
and now I am deposing false.”
(Emphasis supplied) 
19.	 It is crucial to note that in the cross-examination by the appellant, it 
was suggested to the doctor that the signature on Medical Certificate 
(Ex. P-7) and Statement of Doctor (Ex. P-9) dated 28.10.2017 were 
one and the same. It was also suggested that the witness was 
deposing falsely. In the chief-examination, the doctor admitted that 
the appellant approached him and received some tablets though 
he did not remember the date on which the appellant approached 

76
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
him. More importantly, the doctor did not dispute that the letterhead 
belonged to him. The doctor did not deny that the rubber stamp on 
the Medical Certificate was not his. His explanation was that someone 
took away the letterhead and fabricated Ex. P-7. It is also crucial 
to note that the doctor on his own did not produce any register in 
proof of the date on which the appellant approached and consulted 
him. PW-3 was the then Additional Senior Civil Judge and PW-4 was 
holding full additional charge of Addl. Senior Civil Judge’s Court at 
the relevant time.
20.	 The Inquiry Officer found both the charges proved by recording the 
following findings: -
“As per the evidence of P.W.1 and P.W.3 a perusal of Exs. 
P.1 to P.7. Ex.Pl is the letter dated 05-08-2017. Ex.P2 
is the Official Memorandum dated 07-08-2017. Ex.P3 is 
the Explanation Memo dated 09-08-2017. Ex.P4 is the 
Office note dated 19-08-2017. Ex.P5 is the Explanation 
dated 22-08-2017. Ex.P6 is the four days casual leave 
application. Ex.P7 is the medical certificate. Ex.P8 is the 
notice to doctor dated 26-10-2017. Ex.P9 is the statement 
of medical practitioner. It is crystal clear that Sri K.Rajaiah, 
Attender in the Court of Hon’ble Addl. Senior Civil Judge, 
Karimnagar i.e., charged employee was absent to his 
duties from 03-08-2017 to 07-08-2017 without intimating to 
the concerned and due to which inconvenience has been 
caused to the official work in the office of Hon’ble Addl. 
Senior Civil Judge, Karimnagar and further failed to give 
explanation within time to the memo served on individual 
as per Exs. P10 to Pl7 i.e., Ex.P10 is the order dated 28-
10-2017. Ex.P11 is the letter to Hon’ble Prl. District and 
Sessions Judge, Karimnagar dated 15-12-2017. Ex.Pl2 is 
the show cause notice dated 08-02-2018. Ex.P13 is the 
explanation dated 12-02-2018. Ex.P14 is the letter dated 
20-02-2018. Ex.P15 is the proceedings dated 03-03-2018. 
Ex.P16 is the letter dated 07-03-2018. Ex.P17 is the 
letter dated 22-03-2018. The said Sri K. Rajaiah failed 
to disprove the articles of charge framed against him, 
thus the allegations leveled against charged employee 
i.e., Sri K. Rajaiah in charge No.1 is proved. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
77
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
As per evidence of P.W.1, P.W.2 and P.W.3. it is crystal 
clear that Sri K. Rajaiah, Attender submitted his explanation 
i.e., Ex.P5 is the Explanation dated 22-08-2017 and applied 
for 4 days causal leave through Ex.P6 and by enclosing 
Ex.P7 medical certificate dated 07-08-2017, but P.W.2 
categorically stated that Ex.P7 was not issued by him 
and Ex.P7 dated 07-08-2017 do not bear the signature of 
P.W.2 and K. Rajaiah, Attender once approached P.W.2 
and received some tablets and he do not remember the 
date on which said K.Rajaiah approached him. P.W.2 
categorically stated that somebody took away blank 
letter head of P.W.2 and fabricated Ex.P7 and P.W.2 
has not issued Ex.P7 to K.Rajaiah at any point of time 
and when P.W.2 was confronted with the signatures 
on Ex.P.7 and P.9, P.W.2.specifically stated that the 
signature on Ex.P.9 is of P.W.2 and the signature on 
Ex.P.7 do not pertains to P.W.2. Thus, as the P.W.2 is 
appropriate person to state whether Ex.P7 medical 
certificate dated 07-08-2017 was issued by P.W.2 to 
K.Rajaiah or not and P.W.2 categorically stated that 
he has not got issued said Ex.P7. Hence, I can safely 
conclude that the said Ex.P7 which is enclosed to 
Ex.P6 i.e., application seeking grant of casual leave 
from 03-08-2017 to 07-08-2017 is not genuine and not 
issued by P.W.2 and Sri K. Rajaiah, Office Subordinate 
failed to prove that Ex.P7 is genuine medical certificate 
issued by P.W.2. Hence, charge No.2 leveled against Sri 
K.Rajaiah, Office Subordinate is proved. 
Thus, articles of Charge No.1 and II framed against Sri K. 
Rajaiah, office Sub-ordinate in the court of Hon’ble Addl. 
Senior Civil Judge, Karimnagar is proved in enquiry. Hence, 
submitting the enquiry report accordingly.”
(Emphasis supplied)
21.	 After issuance of show cause for imposition of major penalty, by 
order dated 13.11.2018, the appellant was dismissed from service. 
An appeal filed to the administrative side of the High Court resulted 
in a dismissal on 08.01.2021. The appellant’s writ petition challenging 
the dismissal has come to be dismissed by the impugned order. 
Hence, the appellant is before us by way of appeal by special leave.

78
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES:-
22.	 We have heard Mr. Pratap Narayan Sanghi, learned Senior Advocate 
for the appellant and Ms. Sindoora VNL, learned counsel for the 
respondent.
23.	 Mr. Pratap Narayan Sanghi, learned Senior Advocate, submitted that 
the charges in this case have not been established since the illness of 
the appellant and the treatment by the doctor is not in dispute. Learned 
Senior Counsel further submitted that it has not been established 
that the Medical Certificate (Ex. P-7) was fabricated. Learned Senior 
Counsel submitted that the statement of the doctor recorded on 
28.10.2017 was behind the back of the appellant. Lastly, learned Senior 
Advocate submitted that the punishment is grossly disproportionate.
24.	 Ms. Sindoora VNL, learned Advocate, who very ably presented the 
case for the respondent, submitted that at the preliminary enquiry it 
was established that the certificate purported to have been issued 
by Dr. Bommaraveni was not actually issued by him and that the 
doctor deposed that the nursing home did not have any provision 
for admitting patients. Learned counsel submitted that the findings 
of the Inquiry Officer could not be substituted and that court in a 
judicial review ought not to function as a court of appeal. All that 
the court in judicial review is concerned is whether the inquiry was 
held by a competent authority, in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed and in consonance with the principles of natural justice 
and whether any extraneous considerations or evidence has been 
taken into account. According to the learned counsel, none of the 
parameters applied to the present case. Learned counsel submitted 
that the employee attached to a judicial department must maintain 
absolute integrity and discipline.
25.	 Dealing with the quantum, learned Advocate has submitted that 
punishment for forgery has been specifically provided and punishment 
ought to be dismissal in accordance with Rule 9 (x) proviso which 
reads as under: -
“Provided that in all proved cases of misappropriation, 
bribery, bigamy, corruption, moral turpitude, forgery 
and outraging the modesty of women, the penalty of 
dismissal from service shall be imposed.”
(Emphasis supplied)

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
79
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
26.	 We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsel 
for the parties and have perused the records including the written 
submissions filed by the parties. We have also called for and perused 
the original file of the disciplinary inquiry.
QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION:-
27.	 The question that arises for consideration is, whether the appellant 
has made out a case for interference with the order passed in the 
disciplinary proceedings, as upheld by the High Court? 
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION:-
28.	 The primary case against the appellant revolves around the allegation 
that the appellant fabricated the Medical Certificate (Ex. P-7). The 
first charge of submitting a delayed explanation need not detain us 
long. We do not find that a delay of thirteen days’ time for furnishing 
the explanation of facts is unreasonable. The other facets of the 
charge are intrinsically linked to the second charge which we have 
discussed hereinbelow.
29.	 While maintaining the parameters of judicial review, the undisputed 
facts, however, need to be set out. The Medical Certificate (Ex. P-7) 
is a fully handwritten Certificate which the appellant alleged was 
given by Dr. Bommaraveni to him. The fully handwritten certificate 
carries the purported signature of PW-2 as well as the rubber stamp 
and was also on the letterhead of PW-2.
30.	 It should also be borne in mind that it is an admitted position that the 
appellant had consulted the doctor (PW-2) and the doctor (PW-2) 
had given him few tablets though PW-2 says, he does not remember 
the date on which that happened. The doctor also admitted that the 
letterhead belonged to him. The date on the certificate is 07.08.2017 
which was the last day of absence of the appellant. There is no 
denial that the rubber stamp on the Medical Certificate was not his. 
31.	 In this scenario, the real question that arises is, whether the Inquiry 
Officer was justified in accepting the word of the doctor and rejecting 
outright the plea of the appellant to conclude that Ex. P-7 was not 
genuine and Ex. P-7 was not issued by PW-2? Should the Inquiry 
Officer have verified the disputed writing in Ex. P-7 with the undisputed 
signature in Ex. P-9 and/or whether the Inquiry Officer should have 
referred the matter to a handwriting expert?

80
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
GRAVER THE CHARGE – GREATER THE NEED FOR CAUTION 
AND CIRCUMSPECTION: -
32.	 Even though it was a case of word against a word, the doctor admitted 
that the appellant consulted him. He admitted that the letterhead 
belonged to him. He did not dispute about the rubber stamp. He 
further admitted that he gave appellant some tablets, however, he 
does not remember the date and also stated that someone took 
away his blank letterhead and fabricated Ex. P-7 and he has not 
issued Ex. P-7 to the appellant at any point of time. The appellant 
not only suggested to the doctor that the handwriting was his, but 
he also confronted the doctor with Ex. P-9 (the statement given by 
the doctor to the Presiding Judge on 28.10.2017) and suggested 
that the signature is of one and the same person.
33.	 The appellant is a Court Attender and PW-2 is a Medical Practitioner. 
When the doctor admits having treated the appellant, the least that 
was expected from the doctor is to provide the date on which he 
treated him to contradict the case of the appellant. Further the Inquiry 
Officer ought to have verified the disputed and the undisputed writings 
and if any doubt persisted the matter ought to have been referred to 
the handwriting expert. We say so because Ex. P-7 is not a printed 
form certificate but a fully handwritten certificate.
34.	 Reference to handwriting experts and examination of handwriting 
experts is not a procedure alien to disciplinary inquiries. In V.M. 
Saudagar (Dead) through Legal Heirs vs. Divisional Commercial 
Manager, Central Railway and Another1, while restoring the order of 
the Central Administrative Tribunal, which interfered with the penalty 
of the dismissal and after setting aside the order of the High Court, 
this Court held as under: -
“17.4 … … No evidence has been adduced to prove the 
charge of forgery and only the authenticity of the pass has 
been verified by the Enquiry Officer with the statement of 
the S.M. Gole, then Office Superintendent Pass Section. 
CAT noted that even the alleged forged signature has not 
been sent to handwriting expert.”
1	
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2277

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
81
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
35.	 In a similar case where there was a charge of forgery and the 
delinquent denied the charge, this Court in Sawai Singh vs. State 
of Rajasthan2, set aside the judgment of the High Court and granted 
complete relief to the appellant therein. This Court, speaking through 
Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was), 
made the following telling observations: -
“6. … … Perusal of the enquiry report makes perfunctory 
reading — comparing the evidence of Chaturbhuj and 
the appellant it is difficult to accept on what basis 
the enquiry officer accepted the Chaturbhuj version. 
The enquiry officer did not discuss the inherent 
improbabilities of the statements of Chaturbhuj which 
will be noted later.
12. …..The second charge was about committing 
forgery effecting erasion of the word ‘panch’ on the 
nomination paper of Shri Chaturbhuj. This allegation 
was sought to be proved by the evidence of handwriting 
expert. The handwriting expert was not available for 
cross-examination on the ground that at that time he 
was dead. But if the evidence of handwriting expert 
was necessary to prove the guilt of the appellant, 
then it was necessary on the part of the department 
to adduce evidence to call another handwriting expert 
to corroborate their charge.”
[Emphasis supplied]
36.	 Thereafter, highlighting the need for how investigations to the charges 
must be consistent with the requirement of the situation and how 
there must be fair play in action where consequences could be loss 
of job and loss of livelihood, this Court in Sawai Singh (supra) held 
as follows:- 
“16. It has been observed by this Court in Surath 
Chandra Chakrabarty v. State of W.B. [(1970) 3 SCC 548] 
that charges involving consequences of termination 
of service must be specific, though a departmental 
2	
(1986) 3 SCC 454

82
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
enquiry is not like a criminal trial as was noted by 
this Court in the case of State of A.P. v. S. Sree Rama 
Rao [AIR 1963 SC 1723] and as such there is no 
such rule that an offence is not established unless 
it is proved beyond doubt. But in a departmental 
enquiry entailing consequences like loss of job which 
nowadays means loss of livelihood, there must be fair 
play in action; in respect of an order involving adverse 
or penal consequences against an employee, there 
must be investigations to the charges consistent with 
the requirement of the situation in accordance with 
the principles of natural justice insofar as these are 
applicable in a particular situation.”
(Emphasis supplied)
This holding is extremely vital for the case at hand for the reason 
that as was contended by learned Counsel Ms. Sindoora VNL, that 
the penalty for a proved charge of forgery is mandatory dismissal 
from service. Having failed to verify the disputed and the undisputed 
signature, we find that the finding of the Inquiry Officer that Ex. P-7 
was not genuine, is perverse and based on no credible evidence.
37.	 We did not want to stop here. To satisfy ourselves, we called for the 
original file of the disciplinary inquiry from the High Court and perused 
the writings and signature in Ex. P-7 as well as signature in Ex. P-9. 
During the examination of the original file, we also observed that apart 
from Ex. P-9, Dr. Bommaraveni (PW-2) had acknowledged receipt of 
notice dated 26.10.2017 sent from the office of the Additional Senior 
Civil Judge directing him to appear on 28.10.2017.
38.	 On the reverse side of this notice which is available in the file, Dr. 
Bommaraveni had acknowledged the receipt of the notice with his 
signature, date and his rubber stamp. The notice dated 26.10.2017 
in original has been exhibited as Ex. P-8. Immediately after the 
original is a photocopy of the notice carrying the acknowledgement 
in the reverse. This document, though not specifically exhibited, 
it is the document on which Dr. Bommaraveni acknowledged and 
thereafter appeared on 28.10.2017. The original of Ex. P-8 also has 
the following endorsement in the bottom.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
83
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
“Through Sh. Devaraj, Police Constable, Manakondur P.S. 
with a direction to cause service of the notice to through Dr. 
Bommaraveni Swamy Mudiraj and file the acknowledgment 
before the undersigned.” 
39.	 What is however crucial is the rubber stamp on Ex. P-7 is identical 
with the rubber stamp on the reverse of the copy of the notice dated 
26.10.2017.
40.	 What is also significant is that the two undisputed signatures of Dr. 
Bommaraveni, one in exhibit P9 and the other while acknowledging 
receipt of notice are themselves not identical, though broadly similar. 
The signature on the Ex. P-7 Medical Certificate is also not identical 
though broadly similar to what is in the acknowledgement and 
what is on Ex. P-9. In this state of affairs, when nothing conclusive 
emerges one way or the other, prudence would dictate and common 
sense would command that the inquiry officer referred the matter 
to a handwriting expert, before recording a finding of fabrication 
and forgery. Failure to do so on facts, constrains us to hold that the 
charge of forgery has not been proved. 
INEXPLICABLE PECULIARITIES:-
41.	 There are so many other inexplicable peculiarities in this case. When 
the appellant absented himself from 03.08.2017 to 07.08.2017 and 
reported on 08.08.2017, pay was deducted for the period of absence. 
The appellant was already made to suffer with loss of pay. Not only 
this, there is evidence on record of V. Radha Krishna Sharma (PW-
1), that on the request of the appellant to drop further proceedings 
after furnishing explanation on 22.08.2017, the Presiding Officer had 
relented and told the appellant not to repeat the same in future and 
kept the file aside. What appears to have triggered the reopening of 
the issue was the purported absence of the appellant for two days in 
October, 2017. It is not the case of the respondent that the absence 
in October, 2017 was unauthorized. At this stage, the Presiding Officer 
decided to summon the doctor by sending a police constable- Sh. 
Devaraj to his clinic. The doctor appeared on 28.10.2017 and gave 
a statement that the Medical Certificate was not issued by him. In 
this statement, no reference was made about the consultation done 
and the medicine given. The statement was also recorded behind 
the back of the appellant which the respondent, no doubt, labels 

84
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
as a preliminary inquiry. Be that as it may, we need not pronounce 
on the validity of the procedure adopted in recording this statement 
considering the final decision that we propose to take.
42.	 What further emerges is that in December, 2017, PW-1 approached 
the Presiding Officer of the Court for preparation of pay-bills and 
enquired as to whether the monthly pay-bill of the appellant has to 
be prepared. At that stage on 15.12.2017, a letter was written by 
the Presiding Officer to the Principal District and Sessions Judge 
setting out that the action of the appellant amounted to negligence 
and dereliction of duties due to unauthorized absence and a request 
was made to take necessary action.
PARAMETERS FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW:-
43.	 No doubt, as rightly contended by Ms. Sindoora VNL, learned counsel 
for the respondent, the parameters for judicial review against orders 
passed in disciplinary proceedings are limited. However, it is well 
settled that where the findings are based on no evidence a court of 
law is perfectly justified in interfering with the orders in disciplinary 
proceedings. Recently, this Court in Nirbhay Singh Suliya vs. State 
of Madhya Pradesh and Another3, while interfering with the findings 
in a disciplinary proceeding held that if the findings in the enquiry 
report are perverse and not supported by the evidence on record, 
the Court in judicial review can interfere. This Court held as under: -
“41. The High Court has erred in not interfering with the 
order. A valiant attempt was made by Mr. Arjun Garg to 
sustain the impugned order by contending that a writ 
court or this Court cannot act as an appellate court over 
the inquiry report and the only consideration was whether 
the inquiry had been fairly conducted. We are unable to 
accept the said contention. In our opinion, for the reasons 
stated above, the findings in the inquiry report are 
perverse and are not supported by the evidence on 
record. We make bold to record a finding that on the 
available material, no reasonable person would have 
reached the conclusion that enquiry officer reached.
3	
2026 SCC OnLine SC 8

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
85
K. Rajaiah v. The High Court for the State of Telangana
42. In Yoginath D. Bagde v. State of Maharashtra and 
Another 9, Saghir Ahmad, J. lucidly explained the principle 
thus:-
“51. It was lastly contended by Mr Harish N. 
Salve that this Court cannot reappraise the 
evidence which has already been scrutinised 
by the enquiry officer as also by the Disciplinary 
Committee. It is contended that the High Court 
or this Court cannot, in exercise of its jurisdiction 
under Article 226 or Article 32 of the Constitution, 
act as the appellate authority in the domestic 
enquiry or trial and it is not open to this Court to 
reappraise the evidence. The proposition as put 
forward by Mr Salve is in very broad terms and 
cannot be accepted. The law is well settled 
that if the findings are perverse and are not 
supported by evidence on record or the 
findings recorded at the domestic trial are 
such to which no reasonable person would 
have reached, it would be open to the High 
Court as also to this Court to interfere in the 
matter. In Kuldeep Singh v. Commr. Of Police 
[(1999) 2 SCC 10], this Court, relying upon the 
earlier decisions in Nand Kishore Prasad  v. 
State of Bihar [(1978) 3 SCC 366], State of 
Andhra Pradesh v. Rama Rao [AIR 1963 SC 
1723], Central Bank of India Ltd. v. Prakash 
Chand Jain [AIR 1969 SC 983], Bharat Iron 
Works v. Bhagubhai Balubhai Patel [(1976) 1 
SCC 518] as also Rajinder Kumar Kindra v. 
Delhi Admn. [(1984) 4 SCC 635] laid down that 
although the court cannot sit in appeal over the 
findings recorded by the disciplinary authority or 
the enquiry officer in a departmental enquiry, it 
does not mean that in no circumstance can the 
court interfere. It was observed that the power 
of judicial review available to a High Court as 
also to this Court under the Constitution takes 
in its stride the domestic enquiry as well and the 

86
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
courts can interfere with the conclusions reached 
therein if there was no evidence to support the 
findings or the findings recorded were such as 
could not have been reached by an ordinary 
prudent man or the findings were perverse.”
(Emphasis supplied)
44.	 In this case, the appellant was facing a grave charge of fabrication 
of the documents. When charges are grave, the caution and 
circumspection that should be exercised by the authorities should be 
greater. The appellant had joined service in 1998 as an attender. Ms. 
Sindoora, learned Counsel, has produced the copies of the service 
record of the appellant which shows that in 2011, he was awarded 
punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect. 
It is not clear as to what was the charge that led to the penalty but 
whatever it is, the charge in the present disciplinary inquiry, being 
not established, that can have no bearing. Equally, the argument 
of Ms. Sindoora, that the rules provided for a mandatory penalty 
of dismissal also does not require further consideration since the 
charges themselves have not been established. 
CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS:-
45.	 For the reasons stated above, we set aside the impugned judgment 
of the High Court dated 12.02.2024 in WP No.40486 of 2022 and 
allow the appeal. Consequently, the order of dismissal from service 
dated 13.11.2018 and the order of the Appellate Authority dismissing 
the appeal dated 08.01.2021 will all stand set aside. The appellant 
shall be reinstated in service forthwith with all consequential 
benefits including all arrears of salary and emoluments since the 
non-employment was not due to the appellant’s fault. The order 
should be implemented within three weeks from today. The appeal 
is allowed. No order as to costs. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
