[2026] 3 S.C.R. 160 : 2026 INSC 154
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association
v.
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
(Civil Appeal No(s). 1613-1614 of 2026)
13 February 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Alok Aradhe, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue as regards the applicability of the judgments in S.Nithya to 
the cricket associations; applicability of BCCI Constitution to the 
Appellant-District Cricket Association.
Headnotes†
Sports – Cricket – Cricket Associations – Applicability of the 
judgments in S.Nithya to the cricket associations – Respondent 
no.2-ex-office bearer of the appellant-association filed writ 
petition seeking directions that the appellant should conduct 
a free and fair election after preparation of a fresh voters list 
and impugned the decisions taken by appellant associations 
in not complying with the norms as laid down by the High 
Court in previous judgments in S.Nithya v. Union of India and 
Secretary; Tamil Nadu Olympics Association v. S. Nithya (‘S. 
Nithya’) directing that every state sport federation will comply 
with the direction regarding mandatory presence of eminent 
sport person in the federation – Writ petition allowed relying 
upon the judgments in S.Nithya observing that directions in 
Nithya’s case in respect of all sports organisations/clubs/
associations ought to be strictly adhered to – Challenge to:
Held: Petition in S.Nithya was only concerned with reforms in 
athletics governance and championships – Judgments in S. Nithya 
are not applicable to the factual conspectus of the present case – 
When the judgment in S. Nithya was delivered, the judgment in 
BCCI was already holding the field with the Constitution of BCCI 
having received the stamp of approval by this Court – There 
being no prescription or direction in the BCCI judgments on 75% 
membership in an association to be filled by eminent sports persons, 
coupled with no such direction providing that the qualification to 
be member of district association will be concomitant on a person 
being an eminent sportsperson, the directions in S. Nithya would 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
161
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association v.  
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
not be applicable to the fact of the present case concerning sport 
of cricket – Judgment of the High Court set aside to the extent 
indicated. [Paras 15, 26]
Sports – Cricket – Cricket Associations – Functioning of the 
appellant-District Cricket Association in the existing legal 
regime – Applicability of BCCI Constitution to the Appellant-
Association – Plea of the respondents that the appellant must 
amend its Constitution in conformity with the Constitution of 
the BCCI:
Held: The judgment in BCCI does not warrant District Associations 
to model their regulations and bye-laws on exact lines of the BCCI 
Constitution – No judgment or document was brought on record to 
demonstrate any understanding across the cricketing associations 
at the District Level to make their Constitution on exact lines as of 
the BCCI, nor any judgment which directs such a prescription – 
Impugned order, which directs the appellant association, also does 
not place reliance on BCCI per se, but rather on the judgment in 
S. Nithya which is distinguishable – Thus, the argument that the 
appellant must be asked to restructure its functioning and laws in 
terms of the BCCI Constitution, not accepted. [Para 20]
Sports – Cricket – Cricket Associations – Reformative 
measures – Necessary for State Association to initiate reforms 
to ensure that District Associations operate as professional, 
transparent, and in the best interests of the sport:
Held: Though enforcement of reform as contemplated in the BCCI 
judgment cannot be done through judicial review, it is open, rather 
necessary, for the State Association to initiate reforms to ensure 
that District Associations operate as professional, transparent, 
and in the best interests of the sport – Such reforms may include 
transparency in the selection of players and also the execution 
of contracts – In fact, District Associations must volunteer to 
adopt reformative measures such as good governance, refined 
management, transparency, and the exclusion of conflicts of 
interest. [Paras 21, 22]
Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975 – Election of the 
appellant-association – Issues concerning membership and 
composition of the appellant pending before High Court and 
the statutory authority: 

162
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: Such questions to be resolved as expeditiously as 
possible – Judgment and order of the High Court set aside to the 
extent indicated – High Court to dispose of the writ appeal(s) as 
expeditiously as possible in order to enable the statutory authorities 
to complete the enquiry, if necessary, and arrive at its logical 
conclusion, so that the election of the appellant can be conducted 
at the earliest. [Para 26]
Case Law Cited
BCCI v. Cricket Assn. of Bihar [2014] 6 SCR 322 : CA No. 
4235/2014; AIFF v. Rahul Mehra, 2025 INSC 1131 – referred to.
S. Nithya v. Union of India, W.P. (MD) No. 3447 of 2019; Secretary, 
Tamil Nadu Olympics Association v. S. Nithya, W.A. No. 1202 of 
2022 – distinguished.
List of Acts
Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975; Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Cricket; Cricket associations; District Cricket Association; 
Applicability of the judgments in S. Nithya to cricket associations; 
S. Nithya judgments; Applicability of BCCI Constitution to District 
Cricket Association; Reforms in athletics governance and 
championships; Judgments in S. Nithya not applicable to cases 
concerning sport of cricket; Presence of eminent sport person 
in federation; BCCI judgment; Constitution of BCCI; Sports 
organisations/clubs/associations; Eminent sportsperson; State sport 
federation; National Sports Development Code, 2011; Election of 
District Cricket Association; Tamil Nadu Cricket Association.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 1613-1614 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 12.06.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras at Madurai in WAMD Nos. 896 and 915 
of 2024
Appearances for Parties
V. C. Shukla, Amicus Curiae.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
163
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association v.  
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Amol Chitale, Mrs. Pragya Baghel, Ms. Shweta Singh Parihar, 
Sarthak Sharma.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Mayank Mishra, Raghav Sabharwal, Kunwar Surya Pratap, Harsh 
Vardhan Singh, Akshaj Chaturvedi.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
The present appeal(s) are preferred by the appellant Cricket 
Association against the final judgment and order of the Madurai 
Bench of the Madras High Court dated 12.06.2024 disposing of a 
clutch of Writ Appeals, namely Writ Appeal (MD) No. 896 of 2024 
and Writ Appeal (MD) No. 915 of 2024. 
3.	
The appellant is a district cricket association formed in 1958, registered 
as a society under the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975, 
and governed by its rules and bye-laws and is affiliated with the 
Tamil Nadu Cricket Association (‘TNCA’), the State association. 
The facts in both the appeals before the High Court were distinct in 
content but analogous in form in the manner in which they sought 
to impugn the alleged lapses in the workings of the appellant, and 
are canvassed below in brief. 
4.	
Facts in Writ Appeal (MD) No. 896 of 2024: The facts in this appeal 
are that the respondent no. 1 cricket club preferred a writ petition 
seeking direction against the appellant to grant the respondent no. 1 
membership of the appellant association alongside voting rights and 
also allow respondent no. 1 to participate in the knockout tournament 
for the year 2021-2022. The appellant entered appearance and 
brought on record the fact that the respondent no. 1 has already 
been permitted to participate in the tournament, and in this view, the 
cause does not survive. Noting the fact of the respondent no. 1’s 
participation, the learned single judge disposed of the writ petition. 
5.	
Since the writ petition was disposed of as allowed, on the issue 
of voting and membership rights, the appellant herein impugned 
the findings of the single judge in the writ appeal, which has been 

164
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
dismissed by the division bench, observing that the Respondent 
No. 1 club has the right to vote and membership in the appellant 
association. Since then, the respondent club has actively participated 
in tournaments organised by the appellant. The learned counsel 
appearing for the appellant has submitted, on instruction, that insofar 
as respondent no. 1’s voting rights are concerned, the appellant has 
no objection towards the same, and the respondent no. 1 may be 
allowed to vote. In view of these submissions, the issues in appeal(s) 
are confined to the reliefs granted by the High Court qua respondent 
no. 2 only, as outlined below. 
6.	
Facts in Writ Appeal (MD) No. 915 of 2024: The facts relevant 
to this appeal are that respondent no. 2, an ex-office bearer of the 
appellant association, approached the High Court via writ petition, 
seeking directions that the appellant should conduct a free and fair 
election after preparation of a fresh voters list and sought to impugn 
the decisions taken by appellant associations in not complying with 
the norms as laid down by the High Court in previous judgments in 
S. Nithya v. Union of India1 and Secretary, Tamil Nadu Olympics 
Association v. S. Nithya2 (‘S. Nithya’) directing that every state sport 
federation will comply with the direction regarding mandatory presence 
of eminent sport person in the federation and other directions, so far 
as amending the appellant association’s Constitution is concerned, 
to bring them in line with the Constitutions of other similarly situated 
federations. The said prayer(s) were allowed by the High Court in the 
impugned order. Aggrieved, the appellant association has preferred 
the instant appeal. 
7.	
We heard Mr. Amol Chitale, learned counsel appearing for the 
appellant, Mr. Mayank Mishra, learned counsel appearing for the 
respondents, in the present appeal(s) and perused the records. Mr 
Vikash Chandra Shukla, learned counsel, ably assisted the Court 
as Amicus Curiae. 
8.	
The learned counsel appearing for the appellant district association 
has fairly submitted that, insofar as specific prayers of respondent no. 
1 and respondent no. 2 are concerned, the appellant association has 
no objections to them. In this view, while the respondent no. 1 club 
1	
W.P. (MD) No. 3447 of 2019. 
2	
W.A. No. 1202 of 2022. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
165
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association v.  
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
would be permitted to vote in the appellant association, the prayer 
of respondent no. 2 with respect to oversight of the future election 
of the appellant association can also be allowed. 
9.	
The appellant is aggrieved by the reliance of the High Court in 
judgments in S. Nithya (supra) while allowing the writ proceedings, 
which, in the view of the appellant, stand on a different factual-legal 
conspectus and are inapplicable to cricket associations like the 
appellant herein. It is learnt from the records as well as submissions 
made before us that there are certain proceedings pending before the 
High Court concerning membership of the appellant association, and 
it was urged that the issue regarding membership of the appellant 
association may not be dealt in the present appeals, and rather the 
appropriate authorities can take up the pending proceedings and 
decide them as expeditiously as possible. Since the primary grievance 
of the appellant is restricted to the applicability of judgments in 
S. Nithya (supra) to the cricket associations, we take up the very 
issue first. 
10.	 On applicability of Judgments in S. Nithya: The judgment in S. 
Nithya (supra) was an outcome of a Writ Petition preferred before the 
High Court of Judicature at Madras by an athlete, who had won several 
medals in numerous Discus Throw events. The athlete’s grievance 
was that, despite her noteworthy performance, she was denied entry 
to participate in the Open National Championships in 2017 and 2018. 
The writ petitioner, in turn, asked for the issuance of numerous writs 
seeking the institution of multiple reform measures, including, inter 
alia, strict implementation of National Sports Development Code, 
2011, constitution of a Special Committee with eminent sports persons 
for regularising athletics Championships, competitions, meets and 
events in Tamil Nadu, direction to authorities to make appropriate 
safety arrangements and provide proper places of accommodation 
to women athletes for all State Level and National Level Athletics 
Championships, Competitions, Meets and Event, and various other 
transparency measures. 
11.	 As apparent from the various prayers sought in the writ petition, 
the petition in S. Nithya (supra) was only concerned with reforms 
in athletics governance and championships. The learned Single 
Judge allowed the writ petition on 19.01.2022 by passing a range of 
directions in terms of the prayers of the writ petition, placing reliance 

166
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
on judgments of this court in BCCI and the mandate and objectives of 
the National Sports Code, 2011. A writ appeal was preferred through 
the Secretary, Tamil Nadu Olympics Association, in W.A. No. 1202 
of 2022, which was dismissed by the division bench on 26.04.2022. 
12.	 The judgments in S. Nithya (supra) have been relied upon in the 
order impugned before us, observing that directions in Nithya’s case 
in respect of all sports organisations/clubs/associations ought to be 
strictly adhered to, thereby confirming the judgment and order of the 
learned single judge. Before adverting to the contentions raised by 
the appellant, it would be beneficial to extract the relevant directions 
in S. Nithya (supra), which are as under: 
i.	
“The State government should consider for creating a 
legal framework that imposes statutory regulation on the 
functioning of every sports organisation/clubs/association, 
including the state unit of the National Sports Federation in 
respect of every field of sports. The said legal framework 
should include as far as possible all the following aspects 
and directions and which shall continue to be in force until 
the passing of such a statute by the state legislature.
ii.	
Every Sports Association/organisation shall be compulsorily 
registered with the State Government and it shall be 
mandatory for the said organisation to provide its complete 
details including its constitution and details of its members, 
the sports persons registered with the said association, its 
financial status as well as the contributions/funds received 
by the said association, the number and details of events 
conducted by the Association and the credentials of the 
sports persons participating in every such event. 
iii.	
Every Sports Association should have a record of all the 
above stated details and it shall be within the power of the 
State Government to inspect such records at any given 
point of time.
iv.	
The State Government as well as the state unit of the 
National Sports Federation of every sport which is 
recognised by the Central Government shall have a 
grievance cell, in order that deserving sports persons may 
contact them directly in cases where the recognised sports 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
167
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association v.  
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
Association/affiliate does not forward a deserving athlete/
sports person’s name for participation at the national level 
to the concerned National Sports Federation.
v.	
The positions of President, Vice President and 
Secretary of every sports Association/organisation as 
well as important functionaries of such organisations 
including that of the state unit of the National sports 
Federation shall be held only by sports persons and 
it must be ensured that a minimum of 75% of the 
members of any sports body/organisation/association/
NSF shall be composed of eminent sports persons 
and they shall have voting rights. 
vi.	
The selection of athletes shall be within the purview of 
the decision-making powers of the selection committee 
consisting only of sports persons in the respective 
association as well as the sports Federation.
vii.	 No person shall be entitled to hold the position of President, 
Vice President, Secretary or any other important functionary 
in any association as well as Federation on the only 
ground that he or she has contributed financially to the 
said organisation. The holding of such a position shall 
be strictly governed by the Constitution of the respective 
organisation which shall clearly set out the procedure for 
election to the office of President, Vice-President and 
Secretary and other important functionaries, in accordance 
with the previous direction in clause vi. above that such 
positions can only be held by sports persons.
viii.	 Any reference to the term “sports persons‟ for the 
purpose of holding the positions of any of the important 
functionaries in any organisation/association or 
Federation, would mean a person who has participated 
in sports at least at the State level, with participation at 
the national level and winning of awards and accolades 
at the national level being a desirable qualification.
ix.	
An online registration system for all district level, state level 
and national level athletic championships, competitions, 
meets and events, similar to the model followed in 
the Federation Cup Athletics Championships, shall be 

168
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
effectuated immediately, which shall publish online the 
amount allotted and spent on each athlete for such events.
x.	
It shall be mandatory for every association to have a 
website where all its financial aid as sanctioned and granted 
by the sports development authority of the respective State 
as well as by the Union Government must be furnished 
and the details of all the applicants with their respective 
credentials must also be mentioned in a transparent 
manner in the website.
xi.	
In cases where it is found after an enquiry that any 
association/organisation or state unit of the National 
sports Federation has acted against merit in respect of 
the selection of participants, the State Government can 
take penal action against such an organisation including 
blacklisting of such an organisation for a minimum period 
of two years during which the association/organisation will 
not be in a position to sponsor candidates for national 
events or receive grant from the State Government.
xii.	 In the event of any grievance made by any athlete/sports 
person to the state unit of the National sports Federation, 
the same shall be disposed of within a period of one 
week from the date on which such a grievance has been 
raised or before the upcoming event in respect of which 
the grievance is made, whichever is earlier, in order that 
the concerned athlete/sports person does not lose their 
chance for the concerned year. 
xiii.	 In the event of any grievance made with respect to any 
state unit of the National sports Federation, the state 
government shall dispose of the same within a period of 
one week from the date on which such a grievance has 
been raised or before the upcoming event in respect of 
which the grievance is made, whichever is earlier. 
xiv.	 The suggestions placed by the sixth respondent, which 
are extracted in para 9(vi) of this order shall be considered 
by the respondents 1, 4 and 5. Such compliance report 
be filed within a period of three months.” 
(emphasis supplied)

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
169
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association v.  
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
13.	 Mr. Chitale, learned counsel for the appellant has forcefully submitted 
that the directions in judgment in S. Nithya (supra) as made applicable 
on appellant by virtue of the single judge’s order and confirmed by the 
impugned order by the division bench are inapplicable and unviable 
as they cannot be applied to the sport of Cricket, with respect to which 
the decision of this Court in BCCI v. Cricket Assn. of Bihar3 would 
apply. It was argued that the judgment in BCCI (supra), which holds 
the field of regulation in the context of cricket, does not prescribe 
that the post of President, Vice President and Secretary, as well as 
important functionaries of the BCCI and affiliated State Associations, 
shall be held only by sports persons and that 75% of members shall 
be eminent sportspersons. In this view, the directions in S. Nithya 
(supra) do not apply. It was further argued that the direction no. 
(viii) in S. Nithya (supra), regarding the eligibility criteria for ‘sports 
persons’ is onerous and disproportionate to the object sought to be 
achieved, given that posts at the district association should not be 
expected to be filled by persons who have participated in sports 
at the State level. Such a mandate would be counterproductive to 
localisation and democratisation of sports, it was argued. 
14.	 The learned amicus has supported the arguments of the appellant 
and submitted that the law laid down in BCCI (supra) is a special law 
governing the field of Cricket, and the judgment in S. Nithya (supra) 
arising in peculiar facts and circumstances of athletics governance 
may not be applied in the instant case. 
15.	 We agree with the submissions advanced at the Bar regarding the 
inapplicability of the judgments in S. Nithya (supra) to the factual 
conspectus of the present case. When the judgment in S. Nithya 
(supra) was delivered, the judgment in BCCI (supra) was already 
holding the field with the Constitution of BCCI having received the 
stamp of approval by this Court. There being no prescription or 
direction in the BCCI judgments on 75% membership in an association 
to be filled by eminent sports persons, coupled with no such direction 
providing that the qualification to be member of district association 
will be concomitant on a person being an eminent sportsperson, the 
directions in S. Nithya (supra) would not be applicable to the fact of 
the present case concerning sport of cricket. 
3	
CA No. 4235/2014. 

170
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
16.	 Having clarified the legal position, our next inquiry concerns the 
functioning of the appellant association in the existing legal regime 
informed by the applicable regulatory framework. Mr Mayank Mishra, 
learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has submitted that, 
in any event, the appellant must amend its Constitution in conformity 
with the Constitution of the BCCI, the structure of the sport being 
pyramidical. We now take up this issue. 
17.	 On applicability of BCCI Constitution to the Appellant, District 
Cricket Association: Learned Amicus has highlighted the final 
directions in BCCI (supra) to the effect that after registration of the 
Constitution of BCCI, each of the members (State Associations) 
was directed to bring their Constitutions in conformity with BCCI’s 
Constitution by way of suitable amendments. The amicus submits 
that while there was no direction in BCCI (supra) regarding the 
amendment of Constitutions to be done by District Associations, there 
was a consensus among the State Associations that their district 
association would also amend their Constitution in conformity with the 
BCCI’s Constitution. Stating so, it was submitted that the appellant 
should grant membership only to its full members, as done by TNCA 
and BCCI, and also make minor corrections, such as mentioning 
the names of its members in its Constitution/bye-laws, which remain 
unclear and are part of pending proceedings as well. 
18.	 The appellant opposes the submission advanced by amicus and 
respondents, arguing that the judgment in BCCI (supra) only concerns 
the BCCI and its member associations and is not in any manner 
applicable to the District Association. To this end, the appellant 
places strong reliance on the judgment in BCCI itself, wherein the 
Court concluded that the proposed Constitution of the BCCI did not 
stifle upon the rights and internal composition of State associations 
and, in turn, District Association4 and hence the argument advanced 
by associations regarding violation of Article 19 of the Constitution 
was rejected. The relevant extract of the said judgment is as under:
“55. With the above two aspects in mind, let us now 
examine whether the recommendations of the Committee 
have the tendency to violate Article 19(1)(c) or any other 
provision of the Constitution.
(…)
4	
(2016) 8 SCC 535, Para 57. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
171
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association v.  
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
58. We regret our inability to accept the submission so 
vehemently urged before us by the learned counsel for 
BCCI and the State Cricket Associations. We say so, 
firstly because no citizen has come forward in the present 
proceedings or in the earlier round to complain of the 
violation of any fundamental right guaranteed under Article 
19(1)(c) of the Constitution. Secondly and more importantly 
because the recommendations do not, in our opinion, 
affect the composition of the State Cricket Associations 
in any manner. Citizens who have come together to form 
the State Associations continue to associate as before 
with no change in their internal composition. If that be so 
as it indeed is the right guaranteed under Article 19(1)
(c) stands exercised, which exercise would continue to 
enjoy the protection of the constitutional guarantee till 
the association/union or cooperative society, as the case 
may be, continues to exist. What is, however, important 
is that the right under Article 19(1)(c)does not extend to 
guaranteeing to the citizens the concomitant right to pursue 
their goals and objects uninhibited by any regulatory or 
other control. The legal position in this regard is settled by 
several decisions of this Court to which we may gainfully 
refer at this stage.
(…)
64. There is, in the light of the above authoritative 
pronouncements, no room for any doubt that the right 
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(c) cannot be claimed by an 
association or union or a cooperative society as is sought 
to be done in the case at hand, even when the right to form 
an association or union or cooperative society extends to 
the continued existence of such association or union or 
cooperative society with its original voluntary composition. 
But the right does not extend so far as to include the right 
of any such association or union or cooperative society to 
achieve its objects or to conduct its business unhindered 
by any regulatory or other control. Anything beyond the 
protection of the original composition of the association or 
union or cooperative society would fall outside Article 19(1)
(c) and shall be governed by other clauses of Article 19 of 
the Constitution. For instance, the right of the association 

172
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
or union or cooperative society to conduct its business or 
pursue its objects shall be regulated under Article 19(1)
(g) read with clause (6) of the Constitution. So also, the 
right to move freely throughout the territory of India shall 
be governed by Article 19(1)(d) read with clause (5) of 
the Constitution. Suffice it to say that so long as the initial 
voluntary composition of the State Cricket Associations 
which are complaining of the breach of their right under 
Article 19(1)(c) remains unaffected, there is no violation 
of what is guaranteed by Article 19(1)(c).
65. Seen in the backdrop of the above, the recommendations 
made by the Committee in the instant do not interfere with 
or alter the composition of the State Associations. Individual 
citizens who came together to form the State Associations 
have not been asked to discontinue their association nor 
do the recommendations impose upon their members an 
obligation to associate with others with whom they do 
not wish to associate. Composition of the State Cricket 
Associations remain unaffected, and so does the right of 
those forming such associations under Article 19(1)(c). That 
being so, the grievance sought to be made on behalf of 
citizens who have formed the State Associations does not 
stand scrutiny no matter none of those on whose behalf 
the argument is advanced is before this Court to make 
any such grievance. We have, in the light of the above, no 
difficulty in rejecting the first limb of the submissions made 
by the learned counsel opposing the recommendation of 
the Committee that BCCI shall have the Cricket Association 
from each State as a full member”.
19.	 In the recent judgment of this Court in AIFF v. Rahul Mehra,5 while 
answering a similar argument, that the Constitution of All India 
Football Federation shall not be made applicable to the State and 
District Association, this Court has distinguished the judgment in 
BCCI with the pyramidical structure of football and the International 
legislative framework to the effect that the judgment in BCCI arose 
out of a peculiar nature of Cricket as distinguished from Football and 
therefore is not applicable on the football regime.6 
5	
2025 INSC 1131. 
6	
AIFF (supra), paras 64-71. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
173
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association v.  
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
20.	 In simple words, the appellant wants the argument on the applicability 
of BCCI’s Constitution on its functioning to be rejected in terms of the 
ratio in BCCI itself. We have no difficulty in accepting this argument. 
The relevant portions in BCCI extracted above are clear to the effect 
that the judgment in BCCI does not warrant District Associations to 
model their regulations and bye-laws on exact lines of the BCCI 
Constitution. No judgment or document has been brought on record 
to demonstrate any understanding across the cricketing associations 
at the District Level to make their Constitution on exact lines as of 
the BCCI, nor any judgment which directs such a prescription. The 
impugned order, which directs the appellant association, also does 
not place reliance on BCCI per se, but rather on the judgment in S. 
Nithya (supra), which we have already distinguished and clarified in 
the preceding section. In this view, the argument that the appellant 
must be asked to restructure its functioning and laws in terms of the 
BCCI Constitution cannot be accepted. 
21.	 However, though enforcement of such a reform as contemplated in 
the BCCI judgment cannot be done through judicial review, we must 
clarify that it is open, rather necessary, for the State Association 
to initiate reforms to ensure that District Associations operate as 
professional, transparent, and in the best interests of the sport. 
22.	 Such reforms may include transparency in the selection of players 
and also the execution of contracts. In fact, District Associations must 
volunteer to adopt reformative measures such as good governance, 
refined management, transparency, and the exclusion of conflicts 
of interest. Recognising the importance of sport to national life, 
this Court has an occasion to observe that, National, international, 
regional or even mohalla sports in India serve as the Karmabhumi 
where cohesion and collective purpose take tangible form. They 
bring together individuals from diverse social, linguistic, and cultural 
backgrounds under a common pursuit, embodying the Constitutional 
value of fraternity. Here, individual and collective aspirations find a 
way to coalesce. On the field, teamwork compels individuals to set 
aside personal distinctions and work together, cultivating habits of 
cooperation, solidarity, and mutual respect. Accessibility of sports 
is important, for when opportunities to participate are open to all— 
irrespective of race, caste, religion, sex, or economic status—the 
unifying power of sport is amplified. This inclusiveness ensures 
that sports become not a privilege of the few but a medium through 

174
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
which fraternity is strengthened across society. In this way, sports 
operationalise what the framers envisioned: an intangible yet 
indispensable force that holds us together through shared effort and 
common purpose. 
23.	 It is high time we recognize that sporting “facilities and opportunities”7 
are “material resources of the community”8, and their organizers are 
“the institutions of the national life”9. As “places of public resort”10, 
sporting institutions and bodies must remain accessible, not just for 
pursuing sport, but also for its administration. It should be the deeper 
Sadhana (endeavour) of the State, and it is also our Constitutional 
duty to ensure that sporting facilities and opportunities flourish with 
institutional efficiency, integrity, professionalism, and expertise. It is 
also necessary to ensure that sporting facilities and opportunities are 
not concentrated in the hands of the urban economic elite and that 
the revenues from sporting events, intellectual property and media 
rights are so distributed to subserve and encourage accessible and 
affordable sport in our country.11 
24.	 Returning to the facts of the present case, Mr. Amol Chitale has 
submitted that the appellant association’s rules and bye-laws include 
provisions for disqualification and dispute resolution, and in fact 
promote fairness and accountability. He would further submit that the 
association is inclined to carry out amendments to the following affect: 
a)	
Any new inductee in the category of life member will not have the 
right to vote for a period of 3 years from the date of induction. 
b)	
The number of “life members” shall be frozen at 179, which is the 
current strength of “Life Members” in the appellant association. 
The number of “Life Members” shall not be increased beyond 179.
c)	
In order to give adequate representation to the Clubs/
Institutions, there would be no capping on the number of Clubs/
Institutions that can be conferred voting rights in accordance 
with the provisions of the rules and regulations of the appellant 
association.
7	
Article 38(2), Indian Constitution.
8	
Article 39(b), Indian Constitution. 
9	
Article 38, Indian Constitution. 
10	
Article 15(2), Indian Constitution. 
11	
2025 INSC 1131 : All India Football Federation v. Rahul Mehra. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
175
The Tiruchirappalli District Cricket Association v.  
Anna Nagar Cricket Club & Anr. Etc.
d)	
The category of “Family Members of the existing Life Members” 
shall be deleted from the clause which prescribes the categories/
qualifications for grant of “Life Membership” in the rules and 
regulations of the appellant association. 
25.	 We have noted the submission of Mr. Amol Chitale, but have chosen 
not to comment in view of the fact that certain proceedings are 
pending before the High Court and the concerned authorities under 
the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act. Through an affidavit dated 
13.12.2025 filed by the Respondent, we are informed that certain 
members of the appellant association initiated proceedings under 
Section 36 of the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act against 
the appellant, and while the enquiry was pending, they filed writ 
petition(s), primarily seeking direction to forbear the appellant from 
approving certain persons as life members of the Association. We 
are also informed that the Registrar had initiated a suo-motu inquiry, 
challenge to which is pending before the division bench of the High 
Court, where there is an interim order. It is not necessary to refer 
to the pending proceedings any further. 
26.	 Since the issues concerning membership and composition of the 
appellant association are pending before the High Court and the 
statutory authority, we are of the opinion that such questions should 
be resolved as expeditiously as possible. In this view, we allow the 
appeal in part, set aside the judgment and order of the High Court 
to the extent indicated hereinabove, and further direct that the High 
Court shall dispose of the writ appeal(s) as expeditiously as possible 
in order to enable the statutory authorities to complete the enquiry, 
if necessary, and arrive at its logical conclusion, so that the election 
of the appellant can be conduct at the earliest. The High Court, as 
well as the authorities, shall take into account the spirit of our order. 
27.	 The appeal(s) are disposed of accordingly. Pending applications, if 
any, also stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal partly allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
