[2026] 3 S.C.R. 87 : 2026 INSC 145
Sumit
v.
State of U.P. & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 830 of 2026)
09 February 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala* and K.V. Viswanathan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was well within its reasons to grant the 
anticipatory bail by restricting it upto the stage of filing of the 
chargesheet; What will be the position, when an accused has 
been released on bail, pending the investigation, and later upon 
completion of the investigation, chargesheet is filed with addition 
of new cognizable and non-bailable offences.
Headnotes†
Bail – Rejection of Anticipatory Bail – Dowry death – An FIR 
was registered u/s.80(2)/85 BNS and ss.3 and 4 respectively 
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 – The appellant/brother-
in-law of the deceased, apprehending arrest applied for 
anticipatory bail – High Court granted anticipatory bail but 
it was limited only upto filing of the chargesheet – Once the 
chargesheet was filed, the protection earlier granted came to 
an end – Appellant again prayed for anticipatory bail by way 
of a fresh application – High Court rejected the application – 
Correctness:
Held: Either the Court may grant anticipatory bail or may decline – 
However, once having exercised its discretion in favour of the 
accused upon consideration of the overall matter, there was no 
good reason for the High Court to restrict it upto the stage of 
filing of the chargesheet – The position of law is well settled: once 
anticipatory bail is granted, it ordinarily continues without fixed 
expiry – The filing of a charge-sheet, taking of cognizance, or 
issuance of summons does not terminate protection unless special 
reasons are recorded – Risk management can be taken care of 
* Author

88
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
by way of imposing conditions of cooperation, attendance, and 
non-tampering, not by imposing time limits – Where circumstances 
change, modification or cancellation may be sought under 
the BNSS, 2023, but expiry clauses inserted at inception are 
unsustainable – Impugned order passed by the High Court is set 
aside – The appellant is directed to be released on anticipatory 
bail subject to the terms and conditions that the Investigating 
Officer deem fit to impose. [Paras 13, 25-28]
Bail – A circumstance whereafter the grant of bail to an 
accused, further cognizable and non bailable offences are 
added – Position of law:
Held: The accused can surrender and apply for bail for newly 
added cognizable and non-bailable offences – In the event of 
refusal of bail, the accused can certainly be arrested ; (ii) The 
investigating agency can seek order from the court u/ss.437(5) 
or 439(2) of Cr.P.C. respectively for arrest of the accused and his 
custody; (iii) The Court, in exercise of its power u/ss.437(5) or 
439(2) of Cr.P.C. respectively, can direct for taking into custody 
the accused who has already been granted bail after cancellation 
of his bail – The Court in exercise of its power u/s.437(5) as well 
as s.439(2) respectively can direct the person who has already 
been granted bail to be arrested and commit him to custody 
on addition of graver and non-cognizable offences which may 
not be necessary always with order of cancelling of earlier bail; 
(iv) In a case where an accused has already been granted bail, the 
investigating authority on addition of an offence or offences may 
not proceed to arrest the accused, but for arresting the accused 
on such addition of offence or offences it needs to obtain an order 
to arrest the accused from the Court which had granted the bail. 
[Para 34]
Case Law Cited
Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and Others v. State of Punjab 
[1980] 3 SCR 383 : (1980) 2 SCC 565; Sushila Aggarwal & 
Ors. v. State (NCT of Delhi) & Anr. [2020] 2 SCR 1 : (2020) 5 
SCC 1 – followed.
Prahlad Singh Bhati v. NCT Delhi and Another [2001] 2 SCR 684 : 
(2001) 4 SCC 280 – relied on.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
89
Sumit v. State of U.P. & Anr.
Bharat Chaudhary and Anr. v. State of Bihar and Anr. (2003) 8 
SCC 77; Ravindra Saxena v. State of Rajasthan [2009] 16 SCR 
433 : (2010) 1 SCC 684; Siddharth v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. 
(2022) 1 SCC 676; Satender Kumar Antil v. CBI [2022] 10 SCR 
351 : (2022) 10 SCC 51; Md. Asfak Alam v. State of Jharkhand 
and Another [2023] 10 SCR 1184 : 2023 SCC OnLine SC 892; 
Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra [2010] 15 
SCR 201 : (2011) 1 SCC 694; Pradeep Ram v. State of Jharkhand 
and Another [2019] 8 SCR 824 : 2019 Crl. L.J. 3801 – referred to.
High Court of Delhi v. CBI, 2004 SCC OnLine Del 53 – referred to.
List of Acts
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961; Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Bail; Anticipatory Bail; Dowry death; Personal liberty; Filing of 
chargesheet; Anticipatory bail limited upto filing of the chargesheet; 
Surrender; Addition of new cognizable and non-bailable offences; 
Arrest; Cancellation of bail; Addition of an offence; Risk management; 
Arbitrary timelines; Judicial discretion; Investigation.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
830 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 07.01.2026 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad in CRMABAU482BNSS No. 11038 
of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Shiv Sagar Tiwari, Varinder Kumar Sharma, Mata Prasad Singh, 
R.D. Rathore, Vinay Rajput, Ms. Ashiya Bano, Ms. Aakansha Tiwari, 
Ms. Shweta Bhadauria, Yugal Kishor Prasad, Bikash Chandra, 
Bishan Dass, Ms. Gitesh Kumari, Rajesh Ranjan Kumar, Rajesh 
Kumar.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ankit Goel, Mayank Tiwari.

90
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
J.B. Pardiwala & K.V. Viswanathan, JJ.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal arises from the order passed by the High Court of 
Allahabad dated 07.01.2026 in Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail 
Application No.11038/2025 by which the anticipatory bail application 
preferred by the appellant came to be rejected.
3.	
We heard Mr. Varinder Kumar Sharma, the learned counsel appearing 
for the appellant and Mr. Ankit Goel, the learned counsel appearing 
for the respondent-State.
4.	
It appears from the materials on record that the First Information 
Report bearing No.560/2024 came to be registered with the Akbarpur 
Police Station, District Kanpur Dehat, State of Uttar Pradesh for the 
offence punishable under Section 80(2)/85 BNS and Sections 3 and 
4 respectively of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.
5.	
The appellant before us is the brother-in-law (devar) of the deceased.
6.	
The deceased was married to the brother of the appellant past 7 
months.
7.	
The deceased died under mysterious circumstances at her 
matrimonial home. Accordingly, the FIR came to be lodged by the 
mother of the deceased.
8.	
The case at hand as alleged seems to be one of dowry death.
9.	
The appellant before us apprehending arrest had earlier preferred 
an application before the High Court seeking anticipatory bail being 
application no.3992/2025.
10.	 The High Court while granting anticipatory bail passed a very unusual 
order which reads thus:-
“(1) The present Criminal Miscellaneous Anticipatory 
Bail Application has been filed on behalf of the applicant 
Sumit in FIR No. 560 of 2024, under Section 85/80 BNS 
and 3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act, Police Station Akbarpur, 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
91
Sumit v. State of U.P. & Anr.
District Kanpur Dehat, seeking anticipatory bail with 
the prayer that in case of arrest, the applicant may be 
released on bail.
(2) Heard the learned counsel for the applicant and the 
learned Additional Government Advocate and perused 
the file.
(3) The applicant’s learned counsel argued that the 
applicant is innocent and has been implicated in the 
aforementioned sections with malicious intent to harass 
and intimidate him. He fears that he may be arrested in 
the aforementioned case, despite the lack of credible 
evidence against him. The applicant has been accused 
of the crime simply because he is her brother-in-law. The 
First Information Report contains no direct allegations 
against the applicant. The deceased was allegedly beaten 
and strangled on October 21, 2024, but no complaint was 
filed at any police station, nor was a medical examination 
conducted. The deceased committed suicide after staying 
at her parents’ home for a month. He also stated that 
the applicant has no criminal history and no coercive 
proceedings have yet been initiated against him. He further 
states that the applicant undertakes to cooperate during 
the trial and investigation and that he will be present at the 
time required by the investigating agency or the Court and 
it is assured on behalf of the applicant that he is ready to 
cooperate in the process of law and he will honestly make 
himself available before the Court as and when required 
and he is also ready to accept all the conditions which 
the Court may impose on him.
(4) The learned Additional Government Advocate argued 
against the accused anticipatory bail, arguing that the 
offense committed by the applicant is of a serious nature. 
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, 
there is no sufficient basis for the accused release on 
anticipatory bail. Therefore, the accused should not be 
released on anticipatory bail.
(5) It may be stated that in the case of Siddharam 
Satlingappa Mhetre vs. State of Maharashtra, (2011) 1 

92
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
SCC 694, it has been held by the Hon’ble Supreme court 
that while adjudicating on an anticipatory bail application, 
the Court must consider the nature and gravity of the 
charges, the possibility of the accused fleeing the judicial 
process and that the Court must carefully evaluate all the 
material available against the accused and also consider 
the actual role of the accused.
(6) In the present case, having regard to the settled 
principles of law relating to anticipatory bail and having 
regard to the submissions of learned counsel for the parties, 
the nature of the allegations, the role of the applicant and 
all the facts and circumstances of the case, the prayer for 
anticipatory bail is liable to be allowed without any further 
consideration of the merits of the case. Accordingly, the 
anticipatory bail application is allowed.
(7) In case of arrest of the applicant involved in the above 
case crime number, he will be released on anticipatory 
bail (till the filing of the police charge sheet) on furnishing 
a personal bond of Rs. 50,000/- and two sureties of the 
same amount to the satisfaction of the officer in charge 
of the concerned police station, subject to the following 
conditions:-
1. The applicant shall, if required, be present at the 
required time for examination by the police officer.
2. The applicant shall not make any threat, promise 
or inducement, directly or indirectly, to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case, or to any police 
officer to agree not to disclose such facts before the 
Court or to any police officer.
3. The applicant will cooperate during the investigation 
and trial and will not misuse the freedom of bail. In case 
of violation of the above conditions, the Investigating 
Officer/Prosecutor shall issue notice to the applicant 
shall be at liberty to file an appropriate application for 
cancellation of the anticipatory ball granted.
(8) Accordingly, this anticipatory bail application is finally 
disposed of with the above observations.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
93
Sumit v. State of U.P. & Anr.
11.	 A plain reading of the order referred to above would indicate that 
the anticipatory bail was granted by the High Court as prayed for 
but the same was limited only upto filing of the chargesheet. Once 
the chargesheet was filed, the protection earlier granted came to 
an end and in such circumstances, the appellant once again prayed 
for anticipatory bail by way of a fresh application which came to be 
rejected by the High Court.
12.	 We fail to understand what is the idea in restricting the grant of 
anticipatory bail upto the stage of completion of investigation and 
filing of the chargesheet.
13.	 Either the Court may grant anticipatory bail or may decline. However, 
once having exercised its discretion in favour of the accused upon 
consideration of the overall matter, there was no good reason for the 
High Court to restrict it upto the stage of filing of the chargesheet.
14.	 In the earlier order passed by the High Court referred to above in 
para 10 the High Court observed that having regard to the nature 
of the allegations, the role of the applicant and all the facts and 
circumstances of the case, the accused could be said to have made 
out a case for grant of anticipatory bail.
15.	 If the aforesaid be so, then the High Court should have indicated 
while declining to grant anticipatory bail by way of the impugned 
order as to what was so particular or what was so gross that the 
High Court thought fit not to grant anticipatory bail.
POSITION OF LAW
16.	 In Bharat Chaudhary and Anr. vs. State of Bihar and Anr. reported in 
(2003)8 SCC 77, this Court held that there is no restriction in Section 
438 Cr.P.C. to grant anticipatory bail even when charge sheet has 
been filed and cognizance is taken. The relevant part of the said 
decision reads as thus:-
“7. From the perusal of this part of Section 438 of CrPC, 
we find no restriction in regard to exercise of this power 
in a suitable case either by the Court of Session, High 
Court or this Court even when cognizance is taken or 
a charge-sheet is filed. The object of Section 438 is to 
prevent undue harassment of the accused persons by 
pre-trial arrest and detention. The fact, that a court has 

94
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
either taken cognizance of the complaint or the investigating 
agency has filed a charge-sheet, would not by itself, in 
our opinion, prevent the courts concerned from granting 
anticipatory bail in appropriate cases. The gravity of the 
offence is an important factor to be taken into consideration 
while granting such anticipatory bail so also the need for 
custodial interrogation, but these are only factors that must 
be borne in mind by the courts concerned while entertaining 
a petition for grant of anticipatory bail and the fact of taking 
cognizance or filing of a charge-sheet cannot by itself be 
construed as a prohibition against the grant of anticipatory 
bail. In our opinion, the courts i.e. the Court of Session, 
High Court or this Court has the necessary power vested 
in them to grant anticipatory bail in non-bailable offences 
under Section 438 of CrPC even when cognizance is 
taken or a charge-sheet is filed provided the facts of the 
case require the court to do so.”... 
[Emphasis supplied]
17.	 The very same view as aforesaid came to be reiterated in Ravindra 
Saxena vs. State of Rajasthan, reported in (2010) 1 SCC 684. In 
the said case the High Court had rejected the application seeking 
anticipatory bail on the ground that the chargesheet had been filed, 
such approach was held to be erroneous. The Court observed that 
a Constitution Bench in Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and Others vs. 
State of Punjab, reported in (1980) 2 SCC 565, clearly held that the 
anticipatory bail can be granted at any time so long as the applicant 
has not been arrested:
“7. We are of the considered opinion that the approach 
adopted by the High Court is wholly erroneous. The 
application for anticipatory bail has been rejected without 
considering the case of the appellant solely on the ground 
that the challan has now been presented.
8. We may notice here that the provision with regard 
to the grant of anticipatory bail was introduced on the 
recommendations of the Law Commission of India in its 
Forty-first Report dated 24-9- 1969. The recommendations 
were considered by this Court in a Constitution Bench 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
95
Sumit v. State of U.P. & Anr.
decision in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab 
[(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465]. Upon 
consideration of the entire issue this Court laid down certain 
salutary principles to be followed in exercise of the power 
under Section 438 CrPC by the Sessions Court and the 
High Court. It is clearly held that the anticipatory bail can 
be granted at any time so long as the applicant has not 
been arrested. When the application is made to the High 
Court or the Court of Session it must apply its own mind 
on the question and decide when the case is made out 
for granting such relief.” 
[Emphasis supplied]
18.	 In Sushila Aggarwal & Ors. vs. State (NCT of Delhi) & Anr. reported 
in (2020) 5 SCC 1, the following questions were referred to the larger 
Bench of five judges: 
i.	
Whether the protection granted to a person under Section 438 
CrPC should be limited to a fixed period so as to enable the 
person to surrender before the trial court and seek regular bail? 
ii.	
Whether the life of an anticipatory bail should end at the time 
and stage when the accused is summoned by the court?
19.	 The Constitution Bench answered the reference as under:
“91.1. Regarding Question 1, this Court holds that the 
protection granted to a person under Section 438 CrPC 
should not invariably be limited to a fixed period; it should 
enure in favour of the accused without any restriction on 
time. Normal conditions under Section 437(3) read with 
Section 438(2) should be imposed; if there are specific 
facts or features in regard to any offence, it is open for 
the court to impose any appropriate condition (including 
fixed nature of relief, or its being tied to an event), etc. 
91.2. As regards the second question referred to this 
Court, it is held that the life or duration of an anticipatory 
bail order does not end normally at the time and stage 
when the accused is summoned by the court, or when 
charges are framed, but can continue till the end of the 

96
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
trial. Again, if there are any special or peculiar features 
necessitating the court to limit the tenure of anticipatory 
bail, it is open for it to do so.” 
[Emphasis supplied]
20.	 The following observations made by the Constitution Bench in paras 
77.3 and 77.4 respectively of Sushila Aggarwal (supra) are also 
relevant which reads as under:
“77.3. In these circumstances, the mere fact that an 
accused is given relief under Section 438 at one stage, per 
se does not mean that upon the filing of a charge-sheet, 
he is necessarily to surrender or/and apply for regular bail. 
The analogy to “deemed bail” under Section 167(2) with 
anticipatory bail leads this Court to conclude that the mere 
subsequent event of the filing of a charge-sheet cannot 
compel the accused to surrender and seek regular bail. As 
a matter of fact, interestingly, if indeed, if a charge-sheet is 
filed where the accused is on anticipatory bail, the normal 
implication would be that there was no occasion for the 
investigating agency or the police to require his custody, 
because there would have been nothing in his behaviour 
requiring such a step. In other words, an accused, who 
is granted anticipatory bail would continue to be at liberty 
when the charge-sheet is filed, the natural implication is 
that there is no occasion for a direction by the court that 
he be arrested and further that he had cooperated with 
the investigation. 
77.4. At the same time, however, at any time during 
the investigation were any occasion to arise calling 
for intervention of the court for infraction of any of the 
conditions imposed under Section 437(3) read with Section 
438(2) or the violation of any other condition imposed in 
the given facts of a case, recourse can always be had 
under Section 439(2).”
[Emphasis supplied]
21.	 In the High Court of Delhi vs. CBI reported in 2004 SCC OnLine Del 
53, somewhat similar question arose whether Section 170 Cr.P.C. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
97
Sumit v. State of U.P. & Anr.
prevents the Trial Court from taking a charge-sheet on record unless 
the accused is taken into custody. The Delhi High Court observed 
as under: 
“15. Word “custody” appearing in this section does not 
contemplate either police or judicial custody. It merely 
connotes the presentation of accused by the investigating 
officer before the Court at the time of filing of the charge-
sheet whereafter the role of the Court starts. Had it not 
been so the investigating officer would not have been 
vested with powers to release a person on bail in a bailable 
offence after finding that there was sufficient evidence to 
put the accused on trial and it would have been obligatory 
upon him to produce such an accused in custody before 
the Magistrate for being released on bail by the Court. 
16. In case the police/investigating officer thinks it 
unnecessary to present the accused in custody for the 
reason that the accused would neither abscond nor would 
disobey the summons as he has been cooperating in 
investigation and investigation can be completed without 
arresting him, the IO is not obliged to produce such an 
accused in custody.
xxxx xxxx xxxx
19. It appears that the learned Special Judge was labouring 
under a misconception that in every non-bailable and 
cognizable offence the police is required to invariably 
arrest a person, even if it is not essential for the purpose 
of investigation. 
20. Rather the law is otherwise. In normal and ordinary 
course the police should always avoid arresting a person 
and sending him to jail, if it is possible for the police to 
complete the investigation without his arrest and if every 
kind of cooperation is provided by the accused to the 
investigating officer in completing the investigation. It is 
only in cases of utmost necessity, where the investigation 
cannot be completed without arresting the person, for 
instance, a person may be required for recovery of 
incriminating articles or weapon of offence or for eliciting 

98
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
some information or clue as to his accomplices or any 
circumstantial evidence, that his arrest may be necessary. 
Such an arrest may also be necessary if the investigating 
officer concerned or officer in charge of the police station 
thinks that presence of the accused will be difficult to 
procure because of grave and serious nature of crime as 
the possibility of his absconding or disobeying the process 
or fleeing from justice cannot be ruled out.” 
[Emphasis supplied]
22.	 The aforesaid decision of the Delhi High Court received imprimatur 
of this Court in Siddharth vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr., reported 
in (2022) 1 SCC 676, wherein it was observed as under:
“9. We are in agreement with the aforesaid view of the High 
Courts and would like to give our imprimatur to the said 
judicial view. It has rightly been observed on consideration 
of Section 170 CrPC that it does not impose an obligation 
on the officer-in-charge to arrest each and every accused 
at the time of filing of the charge-sheet. We have, in fact, 
come across cases where the accused has cooperated 
with the investigation throughout and yet on the charge-
sheet being filed nonbailable warrants have been issued 
for his production premised on the requirement that there 
is an obligation to arrest the accused and produce him 
before the court. We are of the view that if the investigating 
officer does not believe that the accused will abscond or 
disobey summons he/she is not required to be produced 
in custody. The word “custody” appearing in Section 170 
CrPC does not contemplate either police or judicial custody 
but it merely connotes the presentation of the accused by 
the investigating officer before the court while filing the 
chargesheet. 
10. We may note that personal liberty is an important 
aspect of our constitutional mandate. The occasion to arrest 
an accused during investigation arises when custodial 
investigation becomes necessary or it is a heinous crime 
or where there is a possibility of influencing the witnesses 
or accused may abscond. Merely because an arrest can 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
99
Sumit v. State of U.P. & Anr.
be made because it is lawful does not mandate that arrest 
must be made. A distinction must be made between the 
existence of the power to arrest and the justification for 
exercise of it [Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P., (1994) 4 
SCC 260 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1172] . If arrest is made routine, 
it can cause incalculable harm to the reputation and self-
esteem of a person. If the investigating officer has no 
reason to believe that the accused will abscond or disobey 
summons and has, in fact, throughout cooperated with the 
investigation we fail to appreciate why there should be a 
compulsion on the officer to arrest the accused. 
xxxx xxxx xxxx
12. In the present case when the appellant has joined 
the investigation, investigation has completed and he has 
been roped in after seven years of registration of the FIR 
we can think of no reason why at this stage he must be 
arrested before the chargesheet is taken on record. We 
may note that the learned counsel for the appellant has 
already stated before us that on summons being issued 
the appellant will put the appearance before the trial court.”
23.	 Further, this Court in Satender Kumar Antil vs. CBI reported in 
(2022) 10 SCC 51 said in clear terms that the mandate laid down 
in Siddharth (supra) should be strictly complied with.
24.	 In Md. Asfak Alam vs. State of Jharkhand and Another reported 
in 2023 SCC OnLine SC 892 under a similar situation where the 
appellant therein had been granted interim protection by the High 
Court under Section 438 CrPC and the charge-sheet was filed before 
the application seeking pre-arrest bail was finally heard, the High 
Court rejected the pending anticipatory bail and directed the appellant 
to surrender before the competent authority and seek regular bail. 
In this backdrop, this Court observed as under:
“14. ……What appears from the record is that the appellant 
cooperated with the investigation both before 8-8-2022, 
when no protection was granted to him and after 8-8-2022, 
when he enjoyed protection till the filing of the charge-sheet 
and the cognizance thereof on 1-10-2022. Thus, once the 
charge-sheet was filed and there was no impediment, at 

100
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
least on the part of the accused, the court having regard to 
the nature of the offences, the allegations and the maximum 
sentence of the offences they were likely to carry, ought to 
have granted the bail as a matter of course. However, the 
court did not do so but mechanically rejected and, virtually, 
to rub salt in the wound directed the appellant to surrender 
and seek regular bail before the trial court. Therefore, in 
the opinion of this Court, the High Court fell into error in 
adopting such a casual approach. The impugned order of 
rejecting the bail and directing the appellant, to surrender 
and later seek bail, therefore, cannot stand, and is hereby 
set aside…...” 
[Emphasis supplied]
25.	 Thus, the position of law is well settled: once anticipatory bail is 
granted, it ordinarily continues without fixed expiry. The filing of 
a charge-sheet, taking of cognizance, or issuance of summons 
does not terminate protection unless special reasons are recorded. 
The Constitution Bench in the case of Sushila Aggarwal (supra) 
held that duration is a matter of judicial discretion and cannot be 
confined by arbitrary timelines. In the case of Siddharam Satlingappa 
Mhetre vs. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2011)1 SCC 694, this 
Court similarly cautioned that anticipatory bail should not hinge on 
procedural milestones. 
26.	 Risk management can be taken care of by way of imposing conditions 
of cooperation, attendance, and non-tampering, not by imposing time 
limits. Where circumstances change, modification or cancellation 
may be sought under the BNSS, 2023, but expiry clauses inserted 
at inception are unsustainable.
27.	 In such circumstances referred to above, the impugned order passed 
by the High Court is set aside.
28.	 We order that in the event of arrest of the appellant in connection with 
the offence enumerated above, he shall be released on anticipatory 
bail subject to the terms and conditions that the Investigating Officer 
deem fit to impose.
29.	 Once the appellant is released by the Investigating Officer, he shall 
thereafter appear before the Trial Court and furnish fresh bail bond.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
101
Sumit v. State of U.P. & Anr.
30.	 Before we close this matter, we would like to clarify something 
important. Take a case, wherein an accused has been released 
on bail, pending the investigation, and later upon completion of the 
investigation, chargesheet is filed with addition of new cognizable 
and non-bailable offences, then what would be the position? 
31.	 The aforesaid question was looked into and answered by this Court 
in Pradeep Ram vs. State of Jharkhand and another reported in 2019 
Crl. L.J. 3801, wherein this Court after discussing various decisions, 
more particularly, the decision in Prahlad Singh Bhati vs. NCT Delhi 
and another reported in (2001) 4 SCC 280 held that with the addition 
of a new cognizable and non-bailable offence more particularly of 
a serious nature, the accused becomes disentitled to the liberty 
earlier granted to him in relation to the offences for which the FIR 
came to be registered. 
32.	 In such circumstances, the correct approach of the Court concerned 
should be to apply its mind afresh as to whether the accused is 
entitled for grant of bail in the changed circumstances. 
33.	 In Prahlad Singh Bhati (supra), the FIR initially was registered under 
Sections 306 and 498A of the IPC respectively. But, subsequently, 
the chargesheet showed that the accused had committed offence 
under Sections 302 of the IPC. This Court took the view that with 
the change of the nature of the offence, the accused could be said 
to have become disentitled to the liberty granted to him in relation 
to the offence for which the FIR was registered, more particularly, if 
the offence is altered for an aggravated crime. 
34.	 In such circumstances referred to above, we arrive at following 
conclusions in respect of a circumstance whereafter the grant of 
bail to an accused, further cognizable and non-bailable offences 
are added:-
(i)	
The accused can surrender and apply for bail for newly added 
cognizable and non-bailable offences. In the event of refusal 
of bail, the accused can certainly be arrested.
(ii)	
The investigating agency can seek order from the court under 
Sections 437(5) or 439(2) of Cr.P.C.  respectively for arrest of 
the accused and his custody.
(iii)	 The Court, in exercise of its power under Sections 437(5) or 
439(2) of Cr.P.C. respectively, can direct for taking into custody 

102
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the accused who has already been granted bail after cancellation 
of his bail. The Court in exercise of its power under Section 
437(5) as well as Section 439(2) respectively can direct the 
person who has already been granted bail to be arrested and 
commit him to custody on addition of graver and non-cognizable 
offences which may not be necessary always with order of 
cancelling of earlier bail.
(iv)	 In a case where an accused has already been granted bail, 
the investigating authority on addition of an offence or offences 
may not proceed to arrest the accused, but for arresting the 
accused on such addition of offence or offences it needs to 
obtain an order to arrest the accused from the Court which 
had granted the bail.
35.	 The appeal is accordingly, disposed of.
36.	 Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
37.	 Registry shall forward a copy of this order to the Registrar General, 
High court of Allahabad, who in turn shall place this order before 
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of High Court.
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
