[2026] 3 S.C.R. 1 : 2026 INSC 116
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited
v.
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 753 of 2026)
04 February 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala and K.V. Viswanathan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose for consideration whether dispute with regard to the 
existence and validity of Clause 23 of the Contract Agreement 
clause could have been raised before the arbitrator; that the 
appointment of the arbitrator was during SBP & Co’s case regime 
and before the legislative amendments which came into effect 
from 23.10.2015, were the courts below justified in setting aside 
the award by holding that the clause 23 of the contract was not 
an arbitration agreement.
Headnotes†
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.11 – Appointment of 
arbitrator – Validity of arbitration clause – Contract agreement 
containing dispute resolution clause – Dispute between the 
parties regarding non-payment of escalation cost – Application 
u/s.11 by the appellant-contractor – Allowed by the Single 
judge and arbitrator was appointed – Respondent-Housing 
Board accepted the order and it attained finality – Single 
Judge order was before the introduction of s.11(6A) of the 
1996 Act – Arbitrator allowed the claim of the appellant and 
objection as to validity of the arbitration clause, was held to 
be unsustainable – Respondents then filed s. 34 application 
to set aside the award on the ground of non-existence of an 
arbitration clause, the Clause 23 of the Agreement did not 
have the character of an arbitration clause – Commercial Court 
held that the order of s.11 Court did not have precedential 
value and the order appointing arbitrator was not binding 
in nature, also the arbitrator faulted for not deciding on the 
existence of the arbitration agreement – In appeal, the High 
Court upheld the order of Commercial Court that clause 23 
was not an arbitration clause – Correctness:
* Author

2
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: Single Judge, when he entertained s.11 application and 
interpreted a contractual document had jurisdiction to do so 
u/s.11 – Right or wrong, that decision should bind – Respondents 
did not carry the order appointing an arbitrator in appeal – In 
view thereof, the holding in SBP’s case squarely applies and the 
respondents could not have challenged the existence and validity 
of the arbitration clause before the arbitrator – Order appointing the 
Arbitrator read with the law laid down in SBP’s case that not only 
will the parties be bound before the Arbitrator with regard to the 
finding on existence and validity of the arbitration agreement they 
will also be bound during the subsequent stages of the proceedings 
which would include the s.34 application stage, the s.37 appeal 
stage and before this Court, clearly operates as a res judicata, as 
regards the existence of and validity of the arbitration agreement 
between the parties – Commercial Court missed the conceptual 
distinction between “Precedent” and “Res judicata” and thus, fell 
into an error – Commercial Court and the High Court erred in going 
into the existence and validity of clause 23 and pronouncing that 
the said clause was not an arbitration clause – Judgment of the 
High Court set aside – Matter remitted to the Commercial Court. 
[Paras 29-32]
Jurisprudence – Precedent and Res Judiciata – Distinction:
Held: Decision between two parties which sets out a principle of 
law will operate as a precedent for disputes between two other 
parties too – Precedent operates in rem – In contrast, res judicata 
operates in personam between the same parties either in the later 
stage of the same litigation between them or in a different litigation 
between them. [Para 24]
Case Law Cited
SBP & Co. v. Patel Engineering Limited & Anr. [2005] Supp. 4 
SCR 688 : (2005) 8 SCC 618 – followed.
State of West Bengal v. Sarkar & Sarkar (2018) 12 SCC 736; In 
re Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 & Stamp Act, 1899 [2023] 15 SCR 1081 : 
(2024) 6 SCC 1; State of Rajasthan v. Nemi Chand Mahela and 
Others [2019] 18 SCR 995 : (2019) 14 SCC 179; Canara Bank v. 
N.G. Subbaraya Setty and Another [2018] 3 SCR 884 : (2018) 16 
SCC 228 – referred to.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
3
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
Mohammed Arif Contractor v. State of Rajasthan & Ors., S.B. 
Arbitration No.90/2012; M/s Marudhar Construction v. Rajasthan 
Housing Board & Ors., S.B. Arbitration Application No.132/2014 – 
referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Salmond on Jurisprudence P.J. Fitzgerald (12th Edition) page 
141 – referred to.
List of Acts
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015.
List of Keywords
Appointment of arbitrator; Arbitration agreement; Arbitration 
clause; Res judicata; Precedent; Construction business; Non-
payment of escalation cost; Validity of arbitration clause; Precedent 
operates in rem; Res judicata operates in personam; Contract 
Agreement clause; SBP & Co. vs. Patel Engineering Limited & 
Anr’s case.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
753 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.02.2020 of the High 
Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur in DBCMA No. 2435 
of 2019
With
Civil Appeal No. 754 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Akshat Gupta, Prakhar Saunakiya, Pranav Jain, Ms. Sakshi 
Tikmany, Ms. Yoothica Pallavi.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
K. L. Janjani, Kailash J. Kashyap, Pankaj Kumar Singh, Ms. Archla.

4
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The issues that arise in both the appeals are common and they revolve 
around the interpretation of Clause 23 of the Contract Agreement 
and, more particularly, the question as to whether a dispute with 
regard to the existence and validity of the said clause could have 
been raised before the arbitrator?
3.	
The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 did not apply 
to the arbitral proceedings concerned in these matters. This aspect 
of the matter has been dealt with in detail hereinbelow. 
FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NO.8299 OF 
2021: -
4.	
The present appeal calls in question the correctness of the judgment 
and order dated 20.02.2020 of the High Court of Judicature for 
Rajasthan, Bench at Jaipur in D.B. Civil Miscellaneous Application 
No. 2435 of 2019. 
5.	
On 08.07.2009, the appellant, a sole proprietorship concern, 
engaged in the supply and construction business was awarded the 
construction work for the structure of 40 HIG-1 houses (High-Income 
Group) and 10 HIG-2 Flats (Stilt + 10 Storey) at Sector-29, Pratap 
Nagar, Jaipur, Rajasthan by the respondent. A contract agreement 
bearing No.11/2009-10 for a total value of Rs. 5,27,00,070/- on a 
lump sum basis was entered into and the work was to be completed 
in 12 months’ time. It is the claim of the appellant that the work was 
completed before the stipulated 12 months’ deadline for a lower 
cost of Rs.4,67,72,922/-. The dispute pertained to non-payment 
of Rs.18,95,123/- towards escalation cost under Clause 45 of the 
agreement with regard to prices, of labour and material.
6.	
According to the appellant, since the respondents failed to pay the 
disputed amount or to alternatively constitute an empowered Standing 
Committee to adjudicate the dispute in accordance with Clause 23 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
5
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
of the agreement, despite the appellant’s application and payment 
of fee, a Section 11 Application came to be filed in the High Court.
7.	
Clause 23 reads as under: -
“Clause-23. Standing Committee for settlement of disputes: 
If any question, difference or objection, whatsoever shall 
arise in any way, in connection with or arising out of this 
instrument, or the meaning of operation of any part thereof, 
or the  right duties or liabilities of either party then, save 
in so far as the decision of any such matter, as herein 
before provided has been otherwise provided for and 
whether it has been finally decided accordingly, or whether 
the contract should be terminated, or has been rightly 
terminated and as regards the rights or obligations of the 
parties as the result of such termination, shall be referred 
for decision to the empowered Standing Committee, which 
would consist of the followings:
i)	
Administrative Secretary concerned
ii)	
Finance Secretary or his nominee, not below the 
rank of Dy.Secretary and/or Chief Accounts Officer.
iii)	
Law Secretary or his nominee, not below the rank 
of Joint Legal Remembrancer.
iv)	
Chief Engineer-cum-Additional Secretary of the 
concerned department.
v)	
Chief Engineer concerned (Member Secretary)
The Engineer-in-Charge on receipt of application alongwith 
non refundable prescribed fee, (the fee would be two 
percent of the amount in dispute, not exceeding Rs.One 
Lac) from the Contractor shall refer the disputes to the 
Committee within a period of one month from the date of 
receipt of application.
Procedure and Application for referring cases or settlement 
by the Standing Committee shall be as given in Form 
RPWA 90.”
8.	
A learned Single Judge allowed the Section 11 Application and 
appointed a retired High Court Judge, Hon’ble Mr. Justice J.R. Goyal, 
as the sole arbitrator on the following reasoning:-

6
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“Counsel for applicant submits that although the non-
applicants have constituted the Standing Committee but the 
same being not in terms of Cl.23 of the contract agreement, 
the applicant raised objections regarding constitution of 
the committee and that makes the applicant entitled to get 
the matter referred to the independent Arbitrator.
Reply to the application has been filed and counsel for 
non-applicants submits that for resolving the dispute 
between the Contractor and Rajasthan Housing Board, a 
committee of five officers of Rajasthan Housing Board has 
been constituted in terms of Cl.23 of the contract agreement 
and, therefore, the application is not maintainable and 
deserves to be dismissed.
Indisputably, the Committee constituted by Rajasthan 
Housing Boad, was not in terms of Cl.23 of the contract 
agreement executed between the parties and it is also not in 
dispute that this court has territorial jurisdiction to entertain 
the present application and that certainly seizes the power 
of the non-applicants and it is within the jurisdiction of this 
court and the Chief Justice or the Designated Judge to 
hold jurisdiction to consider the application for appointment 
of Arbitrator u/S.11(6) of the Act, 1996.
Consequently, the instant application succeeds & is 
hereby allowed and this court considers it appropriate to 
appoint Hon’ble Mr. Justice J.R. Goyal (Retd.), T-1-10, 
Paliwal Park, New Sanghi Farm, Tonk Road, Jaipur as 
sole Arbitrator to resolve the arbitral dispute. The cost of 
arbitration & fee of Arbitrator shall be determined in terms 
of the arbitration manual.”
This order was accepted by the respondents and it attained finality. 
It is crucial to note that the order of the learned Single Judge was 
dated 23.05.2014 which is before the introduction of Section 11(6A) 
in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
9.	
Section 11(6) which governed the appointment procedure before the 
23.10.2025 amendments and Section 11(6A) which was brought in 
by the 2015 amendment are both extracted hereinbelow:-

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
7
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
“11 (6): Where, under an appointment procedure agreed 
upon by the parties.–
(a) A party fails to act as required under that 
procedure; or
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail 
to reach an agreement expected of them under that 
procedure; or
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform 
any function entrusted to him or it under that 
procedure.
a party may request the Chief Justice or any person 
or institution designated by him to take the necessary 
measure, unless the agreement on the appointment 
procedure provides other means for securing the 
appointment.”
w.e.f. 23.10.2015
11(6A): The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court, while considering any application under sub-
section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section (6), shall, 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any 
Court, confine to the examination of the existence of 
an arbitration agreement.”
(Emphasis supplied)
AWARD: -
10.	 The learned Arbitrator entered upon the reference and, on 15.09.2015, 
allowed the claim of the appellant to the tune of Rs. 17,10,624.70/- 
along with interest @ 9% per annum from 13.09.2014 till the date of 
realization. Dealing with the objection with regard to the validity of the 
arbitration clause, the learned Arbitrator held that, since no appeal 
was filed against the order appointing the arbitrator, the objection 
was not sustainable. The Arbitrator relied upon the judgment of this 
Court in SBP & Co. vs. Patel Engineering Limited & Anr.1.
1	
(2005) 8 SCC 618

8
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
ORDER OF THE SECTION 34 COURT: -
11.	 The respondents filed a Section 34-Application before the Commercial 
Court No.3, Jaipur seeking to set aside the award. The challenge was 
pivoted on the point of the non-existence of an arbitration clause, the 
argument being that Clause 23 of the Agreement did not have the 
character of an arbitration clause. The Commercial Court accepted 
the submission and on the finding that the order of the Section 11 
Court does not have precedential value, held that the order appointing 
arbitrator was not binding in nature. The Court further held that the 
order appointing the arbitrator did not pronounce any opinion on 
the availability or otherwise of the arbitration agreement in Clause 
23 and as such it proceeded on the basis that the point had been 
kept open to be decided by the Arbitrator. It faulted the Arbitrator for 
not deciding the point of the existence of the arbitration agreement.
12.	 The Court relied on two judgments of the Rajasthan High Court in 
Mohammed Arif Contractor Vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors.2 and 
M/s Marudhar Construction Vs. Rajasthan Housing Board & 
Ors.3 to hold that Clause 23 of the agreement was not an arbitration 
clause. So holding, the Commercial Court set aside the award. 
APPEAL BEFORE THE HIGH COURT: -
13.	 The appellant carried the matter in appeal to the High Court. The 
High Court, while upholding the order of the Commercial Court, 
maintained that Clause 23 was not an arbitration clause. Aggrieved, 
the appellant is before us.
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES: -
14.	 We have heard Mr. Akshat Gupta, learned Counsel for the appellant 
and Mr. Kailash J. Kashyap, learned Counsel for the respondents, who 
ably presented their respective points of view. The learned counsel 
for the appellant contends that the arbitrator was appointed during 
the SBP and Co. (supra) regime and before the incorporation of 
the legislative amendments which came into effect from 23.10.2015. 
Learned counsel submitted that the execution of the contract was 
2	
S.B. Arbitration No.90/2012
3	
S.B. Arbitration Application No.132/2014

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
9
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
on 08.07.2009 and the Section 11 order was dated 23.05.2014 and 
the arbitral award was passed on 15.09.2015. Learned counsel, by 
relying on SBP and Co. (supra), submits that under the said regime, 
the Section 11 court was obliged to determine the “existence” as 
well as “validity” of an arbitration agreement before passing an order 
appointing the arbitrator. Learned counsel contrasted the situation 
with the introduction of Section 11(6A) w.e.f. 23.10.2015 where 
only the Section 11 court is obliged to determine the existence of 
arbitration agreement [Section 11(6A) though deleted, the deletion 
has not yet been notified].
15.	 Learned counsel submitted that when the Section 11 court appointed 
the arbitrator, proceeding on the basis that Clause 23 is an arbitration 
clause and when the said order was accepted by the respondents, 
the respondents have waived their right to object to the validity of 
the arbitration clause. Reliance was placed on Section 4 of the A&C 
Act, 1996.
16.	 In response, the learned counsel for the respondents contended 
by referring to the decision of the Commercial Court that an order 
under Section 11 could not have precedential value and in any event 
there is no decision on the existence and validity of the arbitration 
agreement in the order appointing the arbitrator and, hence, the 
said question was available to be decided by the arbitral tribunal.
17.	 We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsels 
for the parties and perused the written submissions.
QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION:-
18.	 The question that arises for consideration is considering that the 
appointment of the arbitrator in this case was in SBP & Co. (supra) 
regime and before the legislative amendments which came into 
effect from 23.10.2015, were the courts below justified in setting 
aside the award by holding that the Clause 23 of the contract was 
not an arbitration agreement?
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION:-
19.	 In view of the categoric holding by the Seven-Judge Bench in SBP 
(supra), we have no hesitation in holding that the Section 34 court 
erred in going into the existence and validity of Clause 23. The 

10
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
appointment of the Arbitrator happened prior to the amendments 
to the Arbitration Act which came into effect from 23.10.2015. The 
introduction of Section 11(6A) brought a paradigm shift in the scope 
of jurisdiction of the Section 11 court. Post the amendment, the only 
enquiry is about the existence of the arbitration clause. That is very 
well settled.
20.	 However, the present case arose during the SBP (supra) regime. 
It will be useful to extract relevant passages from SBP (supra) to 
understand the scope of the Section 11 court. 
“8. We will first consider the question, as we see it. On 
a plain understanding of the relevant provisions of the 
Act, it is seen that in a case where there is an arbitration 
agreement, a dispute has arisen and one of the parties 
had invoked the agreed procedure for appointment of an 
arbitrator and the other party has not cooperated, the 
party seeking an arbitration, could approach the Chief 
Justice of the High Court if it is an internal arbitration or 
of the Supreme Court if it is an international arbitration 
to have an arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal appointed. The 
Chief Justice, when so requested, could appoint 
an arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal depending on the 
nature of the agreement between the parties and after 
satisfying himself that the conditions for appointment 
of an arbitrator under sub-section (6) of Section 11 
do exist. The Chief Justice could designate another 
person or institution to take the necessary measures. 
The Chief Justice has also to have the qualification of 
the arbitrators in mind before choosing the arbitrator. 
An Arbitral Tribunal so constituted, in terms of Section 
16 of the Act, has the right to decide whether it has 
jurisdiction to proceed with the arbitration, whether 
there was any agreement between the parties and the 
other matters referred to therein.
9. Normally, any tribunal or authority conferred with a power 
to act under a statute, has the jurisdiction to satisfy itself 
that the conditions for the exercise of that power existed 
and that the case calls for the exercise of that power. Such 
an adjudication relating to its own jurisdiction which could 
be called a decision on jurisdictional facts, is not generally 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
11
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
final, unless it is made so by the Act constituting the tribunal. 
Here, sub-section (7) of Section 11 has given a finality to 
the decisions taken by the Chief Justice or any person or 
institution designated by him in respect of matters falling 
under sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) of Section 11. Once 
a statute creates an authority, confers on it power to 
adjudicate and makes its decision final on matters to 
be decided by it, normally, that decision cannot be 
said to be a purely administrative decision. It is really 
a decision on its own jurisdiction for the exercise of 
the power conferred by the statute or to perform the 
duties imposed by the statute. Unless the authority 
satisfies itself that the conditions for exercise of its 
power exist, it could not accede to a request made 
to it for the exercise of the conferred power. While 
exercising the power or performing the duty under Section 
11(6) of the Act, the Chief Justice has to consider whether 
the conditions laid down by the section for the exercise 
of that power or the performance of that duty exist. 
Therefore, unaided by authorities and going by general 
principles, it appears to us that while functioning 
under Section 11(6) of the Act, a Chief Justice or the 
person or institution designated by him, is bound to 
decide whether he has jurisdiction, whether there is 
an arbitration agreement, whether the applicant before 
him is a party, whether the conditions for exercise of 
the power have been fulfilled, and if an arbitrator is 
to be appointed, who is the fit person, in terms of the 
provision. Section 11(7) makes his decision on the 
matters entrusted to him, final.
12. …… We are inclined to the view that the decision 
of the Chief Justice on the issue of jurisdiction and 
the existence of a valid arbitration agreement would 
be binding on the parties when the matter goes to 
the Arbitral Tribunal and at subsequent stages of the 
proceeding except in an appeal in the Supreme Court 
in the case of the decision being by the Chief Justice 
of the High Court or by a Judge of the High Court 
designated by him.

12
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
20. …… But where the jurisdictional issues are decided 
under these sections, before a reference is made, Section 
16 cannot be held to empower the Arbitral Tribunal to 
ignore the decision given by the judicial authority or the 
Chief Justice before the reference to it was made. The 
competence to decide does not enable the Arbitral Tribunal 
to get over the finality conferred on an order passed prior 
to its entering upon the reference by the very statute that 
creates it. That is the position arising out of Section 11(7) 
of the Act read with Section 16 thereof. The finality given 
to the order of the Chief Justice on the matters within his 
competence under Section 11 of the Act are incapable of 
being reopened before the Arbitral Tribunal. In Konkan 
Rly. what is considered is only the fact that under Section 
16, the Arbitral Tribunal has the right to rule on its own 
jurisdiction and any objection, with respect to the existence 
or validity of the arbitration agreement. What is the impact 
of Section 11(7) of the Act on the Arbitral Tribunal 
constituted by an order under Section 11(6) of the Act, 
was not considered. Obviously, this was because of 
the view taken in that decision that the Chief Justice 
is not expected to decide anything while entertaining 
a request under Section 11(6) of the Act and is only 
performing an administrative function in appointing 
an Arbitral Tribunal. Once it is held that there is an 
adjudicatory function entrusted to the Chief Justice 
by the Act, obviously, the right of the Arbitral Tribunal 
to go behind the order passed by the Chief Justice 
would take another hue and would be controlled by 
Section 11(7) of the Act.
25. … … While constituting an Arbitral Tribunal, on the 
scheme of the Act, the Chief Justice has to consider 
whether he as the Chief Justice has jurisdiction 
in relation to the contract, whether there was an 
arbitration agreement in terms of Section 7 of the Act 
and whether the person before him with the request, 
is a party to the arbitration agreement. On coming 
to a conclusion on these aspects, he has to enquire 
whether the conditions for exercise of his power under 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
13
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
Section 11(6) of the Act exist in the case and only 
on being satisfied in that behalf, could he appoint 
an arbitrator or an Arbitral Tribunal on the basis of 
the request. It is difficult to say that when one of the 
parties raises an objection that there is no arbitration 
agreement, raises an objection that the person who 
has come forward with a request is not a party to the 
arbitration agreement, the Chief Justice can come to 
a conclusion on those objections without following 
an adjudicatory process. Can he constitute an Arbitral 
Tribunal, without considering these questions? If he 
can do so, why should such a function be entrusted 
to a high judicial authority like the Chief Justice. 
Similarly, when the party raises an objection that the 
conditions for exercise of the power under Section 
11(6) of the Act are not fulfilled and the Chief Justice 
comes to the conclusion that they have been fulfilled, 
it is difficult to say that he was not adjudicating on a 
dispute between the parties and was merely passing 
an administrative order. It is also not correct to say that 
by the mere constitution of an Arbitral Tribunal the rights 
of the parties are not affected. Dragging a party to an 
arbitration when there existed no arbitration agreement 
or when there existed no arbitrable dispute, can certainly 
affect the right of that party, and, even on monetary terms, 
impose on him a serious liability for meeting the expenses 
of the arbitration, even if it be the preliminary expenses 
and his objection is upheld by the Arbitral Tribunal. 
Therefore, it is not possible to accept the position 
that no adjudication is involved in the constitution of 
an Arbitral Tribunal.
30. … … We also feel that adequate attention was not 
paid to the requirement of the Chief Justice having to 
decide that there is an arbitration agreement in terms of 
Section 7 of the Act before he could exercise his power 
under Section 11(6) of the Act and its implication. The 
aspect, whether there was an arbitration agreement, 
was not merely a jurisdictional fact for commencing 
the arbitration itself, but it was also a jurisdictional 

14
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
fact for appointing an arbitrator on a motion under 
Section 11(6) of the Act, was not kept in view. A Chief 
Justice could appoint an arbitrator in exercise of his 
power only if there existed an arbitration agreement 
and without holding that there was an agreement, it 
would not be open to him to appoint an arbitrator 
saying that he was appointing an arbitrator since he 
has been moved in that behalf and the applicant before 
him asserts that there is an arbitration agreement. 
Acceptance of such an argument, with great respect, 
would reduce the high judicial authority entrusted with 
the power to appoint an arbitrator, an automaton and 
subservient to the Arbitral Tribunal which he himself 
brings into existence. ……
39. It is necessary to define what exactly the Chief 
Justice, approached with an application under Section 
11 of the Act, is to decide at that stage. Obviously, 
he has to decide his own jurisdiction in the sense 
whether the party making the motion has approached 
the right High Court. He has to decide whether there 
is an arbitration agreement, as defined in the Act and 
whether the person who has made the request before 
him, is a party to such an agreement. It is necessary to 
indicate that he can also decide the question whether 
the claim was a dead one; or a long-barred claim 
that was sought to be resurrected and whether the 
parties have concluded the transaction by recording 
satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligations or 
by receiving the final payment without objection……
47 (i) The power exercised by the Chief Justice of the High 
Court or the Chief Justice of India under Section 11(6) of 
the Act is not an administrative power. It is a judicial power.
(iv) The Chief Justice or the designated Judge will have 
the right to decide the preliminary aspects as indicated 
in the earlier part of this judgment. These will be his own 
jurisdiction to entertain the request, the existence of a 
valid arbitration agreement, the existence or otherwise of 
a live claim, the existence of the condition for the exercise 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
15
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
of his power and on the qualifications of the arbitrator or 
arbitrators. The Chief Justice or the designated Judge 
would be entitled to seek the opinion of an institution in 
the matter of nominating an arbitrator qualified in terms 
of Section 11(8) of the Act if the need arises but the order 
appointing the arbitrator could only be that of the Chief 
Justice or the designated Judge.
(vii) Since an order passed by the Chief Justice of the 
High Court or by the designated Judge of that Court is 
a judicial order, an appeal will lie against that order only 
under Article 136 of the Constitution to the Supreme Court.”
(Emphasis supplied)
21.	 This principle was reiterated in State of West Bengal vs. Sarkar 
& Sarkar4.
“8. It was the vehement contention of the learned counsel 
for the appellant based on a series of judgments rendered 
by this Court that Clause 12 (extracted above) was not an 
arbitral clause and that the arbitrator as well as the High 
Court had erred in determining the same.
9. The learned counsel for the respondent Sarkar & Sarkar 
contested the claim of the appellant. It was submitted that 
the appellant could not be permitted even to raise the 
instant plea so as to assail the order passed either by the 
arbitrator (on 15-1-2004) or by the High Court (on 16-5-
2006). The instant submission of the learned counsel for 
the respondent was premised on the judgment rendered 
by this Court in SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd. Our pointed 
attention was drawn to the conclusions drawn by the 
Constitution Bench in the above judgment in para 20. Para 
20 is reproduced below: (SCC pp. 649-50)
“20. Section 16 is said to be the recognition of the principle 
of Kompetenz-Kompetenz.  The fact that the Arbitral 
Tribunal has the competence to rule on its own jurisdiction 
and to define the contours of its jurisdiction, only means 
4	
(2018) 12 SCC 736

16
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
that when such issues arise before it, the Tribunal can, and 
possibly, ought to decide them. This can happen when the 
parties have gone to the Arbitral Tribunal without recourse 
to Section 8 or 11 of the Act. But where the jurisdictional 
issues are decided under these sections, before a reference 
is made, Section 16 cannot be held to empower the Arbitral 
Tribunal to ignore the decision given by the judicial authority 
or the Chief Justice before the reference to it was made. 
The competence to decide does not enable the Arbitral 
Tribunal to get over the finality conferred on an order 
passed prior to its entering upon the reference by the very 
statute that creates it. That is the position arising out of 
Section 11(7) of the Act read with Section 16 thereof. 
The finality given to the order of the Chief Justice on 
the matters within his competence under Section 11 
of the Act are incapable of being reopened before the 
Arbitral Tribunal. In Konkan Railway what is considered is 
only the fact that under Section 16, the Arbitral Tribunal has 
the right to rule on its own jurisdiction and any objection, 
with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration 
agreement. What is the impact of Section 11(7) of the 
Act on the Arbitral Tribunal constituted by an order under 
Section 11(6) of the Act, was not considered. Obviously, 
this was because of the view taken in that decision that 
the Chief Justice is not expected to decide anything while 
entertaining a request under Section 11(6) of the Act and 
is only performing an administrative function in appointing 
an Arbitral Tribunal.  Once it is held that there is an 
adjudicatory function entrusted to the Chief Justice 
by the Act, obviously, the right of the Arbitral Tribunal 
to go behind the order passed by the Chief Justice 
would take another hue and would be controlled by 
Section 11(7) of the Act.”
10.  It was the submission of the learned counsel for 
the respondent that proceedings could not have been 
entertained by the arbitrator under Section 16 of the 
Arbitration Act in the present controversy because by 
the orders of the High Court dated 24-5-2002 and 26-9-
2002 (extracted above), the appointment of the arbitrator 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
17
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
was made in exercise of the powers vested in the High 
Court under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act. The factual 
position depicted hereinabove as also the orders referred to 
hereinabove, leave no room for doubt that Justice (Retired) 
S.S. Ganguly was actually appointed as an arbitrator by 
the High Court in exercise of the powers vested in the 
High Court under Section 11 of the Arbitration Act. That 
being the position, the learned counsel for the respondent 
is fully justified in her submission that the said order could 
not be tested by the arbitrator while considering the claim 
raised by the appellant State of West Bengal under Section 
16 of the Arbitration Act. Thus viewed, irrespective of 
whether Clause 12 extracted hereinabove postulated 
the adjudication of dispute between the parties through 
an arbitrator, it is now not open to the appellant before 
this Court to raise a challenge to the order passed by 
the High Court appointing an arbitrator.” 
(emphasis supplied)
22.	 As held in SBP (supra), a Section 11 court was bound to decide 
whether there was an arbitration agreement and further that such a 
finding on the existence of a valid arbitration agreement would be 
binding on the parties when the matter goes to the Arbitral Tribunal 
and at subsequent stages of the proceedings. The only exception 
being when the order appointing the Arbitrator is challenged before 
this Court. The highlighted portion of SBP (supra), as extracted above, 
puts this matter beyond any controversy. In the present case, the 
order appointing the Arbitrator attained finality with no challenge being 
thrown. The respondents accepted the order and did not challenge 
the appointment in this Court. We have extracted the findings of the 
order appointing the Arbitrator. The parties proceeded on the basis 
that Clause 23 was an arbitration clause and in this scenario, the 
only conclusion possible is that though not very categoric there is 
an implied holding in the order appointing the Arbitrator about the 
existence and validity of the arbitration agreement. For if it were not 
so, the appointment could not have been and would not have been 
made. The fact that the respondents accepted the order and did not 
challenge it only puts the matter beyond any pale of controversy. The 
further finding of the Commercial Court in the Section 34 application 

18
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
that the order of the Section 11 court did not have any precedential 
value and hence the order will not be binding is in the teeth of the 
judgment in SBP (supra).
LEGAL POSITION FROM 23.10.2015: -
23.	 The scenario would have been totally different if the 2015 
(Amendment) Act had applied to the arbitral proceedings. The 
scope of the inquiry has been clarified in In re Interplay Between 
Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 & Stamp Act, 18995, in the following terms : -
“164. The 2015 Amendment Act has laid down different 
parameters for judicial review under Section 8 and 
Section 11. Where Section 8 requires the Referral 
Court to look into the prima facie existence of a valid 
arbitration agreement, Section 11 confines the Court’s 
jurisdiction to the examination of the existence of 
an arbitration agreement. Although the object and 
purpose behind both Sections 8 and 11 is to compel 
parties to abide by their contractual understanding, the 
scope of power of the Referral Courts under the said 
provisions is intended to be different. The same is also 
evident from the fact that Section 37 of the Arbitration 
Act allows an appeal from the order of an Arbitral 
Tribunal refusing to refer the parties to arbitration 
under Section 8, but not from Section 11. Thus, the 
2015 Amendment Act has legislatively overruled the 
dictum of Patel Engg. [SBP & Co. v. Patel Engg. Ltd., 
(2005) 8 SCC 618] where it was held that Section 8 and 
Section 11 are complementary in nature. Accordingly, 
the two provisions cannot be read as laying down a 
similar standard.
165. The legislature confined the scope of reference 
under Section 11(6-A) to the examination of the 
existence of an arbitration agreement. The use of the 
term “examination” in itself connotes that the scope 
of the power is limited to a prima facie determination. 
5	
(2024) 6 SCC 1

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
19
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
Since the Arbitration Act is a self-contained code, the 
requirement of “existence” of an arbitration agreement 
draws effect from Section 7 of the Arbitration Act. In 
Duro Felguera [Duro Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram 
Port Ltd., (2017) 9 SCC 729, this Court held that the 
Referral Courts only need to consider one aspect to 
determine the existence of an arbitration agreement — 
whether the underlying contract contains an arbitration 
agreement which provides for arbitration pertaining to 
the disputes which have arisen between the parties to 
the agreement. Therefore, the scope of examination 
under Section 11(6-A) should be confined to the 
existence of an arbitration agreement on the basis 
of Section 7. Similarly, the validity of an arbitration 
agreement, in view of Section 7, should be restricted 
to the requirement of formal validity such as the 
requirement that the agreement be in writing. This 
interpretation also gives true effect to the doctrine 
of competence-competence by leaving the issue of 
substantive existence and validity of an arbitration 
agreement to be decided by Arbitral Tribunal under 
Section 16. We accordingly clarify the position of law 
laid down in Vidya Drolia [Vidya Drolia v. Durga Trading 
Corpn., (2021) 2 SCC 1 in the context of Section 8 and 
Section 11 of the Arbitration Act.
167. Section 11(6-A) uses the expression “examination 
of the existence of an arbitration agreement”. The 
purport of using the word “examination” connotes 
that the legislature intends that the Referral Court 
has to inspect or scrutinise the dealings between the 
parties for the existence of an arbitration agreement. 
Moreover, the expression “examination” does not 
connote or imply a laborious or contested inquiry. [ P. 
Ramanatha Aiyar, The Law Lexicon (2nd Edn., 1997) 
666.] On the other hand, Section 16 provides that the 
Arbitral Tribunal can “rule” on its jurisdiction, including 
the existence and validity of an arbitration agreement. 
A “ruling” connotes adjudication of disputes after 
admitting evidence from the parties. Therefore, it 

20
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
is evident that the Referral Court is only required 
to examine the existence of arbitration agreements, 
whereas the Arbitral Tribunal ought to rule on its 
jurisdiction, including the issues pertaining to the 
existence and validity of an arbitration agreement. A 
similar view was adopted by this Court in Shin-Etsu 
Chemical Co. Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 
234].
169. When the Referral Court renders a prima facie opinion, 
neither the Arbitral Tribunal, nor the Court enforcing the 
arbitral award will be bound by such a prima facie view. 
If a prima facie view as to the existence of an arbitration 
agreement is taken by the Referral Court, it still allows 
the Arbitral Tribunal to examine the issue in depth. Such 
a legal approach will help the Referral Court in weeding 
out prima facie non-existent arbitration agreements. It will 
also protect the jurisdictional competence of the Arbitral 
Tribunals to decide on issues pertaining to the existence 
and validity of an arbitration agreement.”
[Emphasis supplied]
The above is set out only to bring out the contrast. Section 26 of the 
2015 Amendment Act also made this very explicit.
 “26. Act not to apply to pending arbitral proceedings.– 
Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the arbitral 
proceedings commenced, in accordance with the provisions 
of Section 21 of the principal Act, before the commencement 
of this Act unless the parties otherwise agree but this Act 
shall apply in relation to arbitral proceedings commenced 
on or after the date of commencement of this Act”
PRECEDENT AND RES JUDICATA – DISTINCTION: -
24.	 There is a clear conceptual distinction between precedent and res 
judicata. Salmond on Jurisprudence P.J. Fitzgerald (12th Edition) page 
141 states “a judicial precedent speaks in England with authority; it is 
not merely evidence of the law but a source of it, and the courts are 
bound to follow the law that is so established”. A decision between two 
parties which sets out a principle of law will operate as a precedent 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
21
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
for disputes between two other parties too. A precedent operates in 
rem. In contrast, a res judicata operates in personam between the 
same parties either in the later stage of the same litigation between 
them or in a different litigation between them. That is the essential 
distinction between the two. 
25.	 This Court in State of Rajasthan vs. Nemi Chand Mahela and 
Others6, held as under:- 
“11. The learned counsel for the petitioners had drawn 
our attention to para 22 of the decision in  Manmohan 
Sharma case [Manmohan Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, 
(2014) 5 SCC 782 which refers to the case of one Danveer 
Singh whose writ petition had been allowed [Danveer 
Singh  v.  Rural Development & Panchyati Raj Deptt., 
WP (C) No. 2200 of 2000 sub nom Jayanti Sharma v. Rural 
Development & Panchyati Raj Deptt., WP (C) No. 1646 
of 2000, order dated 26-2-2001 (Raj)] and the order 
had attained finality as it was not challenged before the 
Division Bench or before the Supreme Court. Termination of 
services in the case of Danveer Singh, it was accordingly 
held, was not justified and in accordance with law. The 
reasoning given in paras 22 and 23 in Manmohan Sharma 
case [Manmohan Sharma v. State of Rajasthan, (2014) 
5 SCC 782 relating to the case of Danveer Singh would 
reflect the difference between the doctrine of res judicata 
and law of precedent. Res judicata operates in personam 
i.e. the matter in issue between the same parties in the 
former litigation, while law of precedent operates in rem i.e. 
the law once settled is binding on all under the jurisdiction 
of the High Court and the Supreme Court. Res judicata 
binds the parties to the proceedings for the reason that 
there should be an end to the litigation and therefore, 
subsequent proceeding inter se parties to the litigation is 
barred. Therefore, law of res judicata concerns the same 
matter, while law of precedent concerns application of 
law in a similar issue. In res judicata, the correctness of 
the decision is normally immaterial and it does not matter 
6	
(2019) 14 SCC 179

22
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
whether the previous decision was right or wrong, unless 
the erroneous determination relates to the jurisdictional 
matter of that body. [See Makhija Construction & Engg. (P) 
Ltd. v. Indore Development Authority, (2005) 6 SCC 304] ]”
26.	 The Commercial Court to hold against the appellant relied on two 
judgments of the Rajasthan High Court, namely, Mohammed Arif 
Contractor (supra) and M/s Marudhar Construction (supra). 
The finding of the Commercial Court was that in Mohammed Arif 
(supra) (judgment dated 08.04.2015) a learned single judge, while 
adjudicating a Section 11 Application, held an identical Clause 23 to 
be not an arbitration clause. M/s Marudhar Construction (supra) 
was a short order dated 06.05.2016 in a Section 11 Application which 
followed Mohammed Arif (supra).
27.	 The said judgments will not enure to the support of the respondents. 
In the present case, while adjudicating a Section 11 Application a 
learned single judge, who had jurisdiction, interpreted the contractual 
document and appointed an arbitrator. We have already held 
hereinabove that in the said order though the finding is not categoric, 
there is an implied holding about the existence and validity of the 
arbitration agreement. As held in Nemi Chand (supra) the correctness 
of the decision is immaterial and it did not matter whether the previous 
decision was right or wrong unless their erroneous determination 
relates to the jurisdiction of the body.
28.	 In an erudite judgment, speaking for this Court Rohinton Fali Nariman, 
J. in Canara Bank vs. N.G. Subbaraya Setty and Another7, 
summarised the principles thus:-
“34. Given the conspectus of authorities that have been 
referred to by us hereinabove, the law on the subject may 
be stated as follows:
34.1. The general rule is that all issues that arise directly 
and substantially in a former suit or proceeding between 
the same parties are res judicata in a subsequent suit 
or proceeding between the same parties. These would 
include issues of fact, mixed questions of fact and law, 
and issues of law.
7	
(2018) 16 SCC 228

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
23
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
34.2. To this general proposition of law, there are certain 
exceptions when it comes to issues of law:
34.2.1.  Where an issue of law decided between the 
same parties in a former suit or proceeding relates to the 
jurisdiction of the court, an erroneous decision in the former 
suit or proceeding is not res judicata in a subsequent suit 
or proceeding between the same parties, even where the 
issue raised in the second suit or proceeding is directly and 
substantially the same as that raised in the former suit or 
proceeding. This follows from a reading of Section 11 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure itself, for the Court which decides 
the suit has to be a court competent to try such suit. When 
read with Explanation I to Section 11, it is obvious that 
both the former as well as the subsequent suit need to be 
decided in courts competent to try such suits, for the “former 
suit” can be a suit instituted after the first suit, but which 
has been decided prior to the suit which was instituted 
earlier. An erroneous decision as to the jurisdiction of a 
court cannot clothe that court with jurisdiction where it has 
none. Obviously, a civil court cannot send a person to jail 
for an offence committed under the Penal Code. If it does 
so, such a judgment would not bind a Magistrate and/or 
Sessions Court in a subsequent proceeding between the 
same parties, where the Magistrate sentences the same 
person for the same offence under the Penal Code. Equally, 
a civil court cannot decide a suit between a landlord and a 
tenant arising out of the rights claimed under a Rent Act, 
where the Rent Act clothes a special court with jurisdiction 
to decide such suits. As an example, under Section 28 
of the Bombay Rent Act, 1947, the Small Cause Court 
has exclusive jurisdiction to hear and decide proceedings 
between a landlord and a tenant in respect of rights which 
arise out of the Bombay Rent Act, and no other court has 
jurisdiction to embark upon the same. In this case, even 
though the civil court, in the absence of the statutory bar 
created by the Rent Act, would have jurisdiction to decide 
such suits, it is the statutory bar created by the Rent Act 
that must be given effect to as a matter of public policy. 
[See, Natraj Studios (P) Ltd. v. Navrang Studios at SCR 
p. 482]. An erroneous decision clothing the civil court with 

24
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
jurisdiction to embark upon a suit filed by a landlord against 
a tenant, in respect of rights claimed under the Bombay 
Rent Act, would, therefore, not operate as res judicata 
in a subsequent suit filed before the Small Cause Court 
between the same parties in respect of the same matter 
directly and substantially in issue in the former suit.
34.2.2. An issue of law which arises between the same 
parties in a subsequent suit or proceeding is not res 
judicata if, by an erroneous decision given on a statutory 
prohibition in the former suit or proceeding, the statutory 
prohibition is not given effect to. This is despite the fact that 
the matter in issue between the parties may be the same 
as that directly and substantially in issue in the previous 
suit or proceeding. This is for the reason that in such 
cases, the rights of the parties are not the only matter for 
consideration (as is the case of an erroneous interpretation 
of a statute inter partes), as the public policy contained in 
the statutory prohibition cannot be set at naught. This is 
for the same reason as that contained in matters which 
pertain to issues of law that raise jurisdictional questions. 
We have seen how, in Natraj Studios, it is the public policy 
of the statutory prohibition contained in Section 28 of the 
Bombay Rent Act that has to be given effect to. Likewise, 
the public policy contained in other statutory prohibitions, 
which need not necessarily go to jurisdiction of a court, 
must equally be given effect to, as otherwise special 
principles of law are fastened upon parties when special 
considerations relating to public policy mandate that this 
cannot be done.
34.3. Another exception to this general rule follows from 
the matter in issue being an issue of law different from 
that in the previous suit or proceeding. This can happen 
when the issue of law in the second suit or proceeding 
is based on different facts from the matter directly and 
substantially in issue in the first suit or proceeding. Equally, 
where the law is altered by a competent authority since the 
earlier decision, the matter in issue in the subsequent suit 
or proceeding is not the same as in the previous suit or 
proceeding, because the law to be interpreted is different.”

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
25
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
29.	 The learned single judge, in the present case, when he entertained 
a Section 11 Application and interpreted a contractual document had 
jurisdiction to do so under Section 11. Right or wrong, that decision 
should bind. The respondents did not carry the order appointing an 
arbitrator in appeal. In view of the same, the holding in SBP (supra), 
squarely applies and on the present facts the respondents could not 
have challenged the existence and validity of the arbitration clause 
before the arbitrator. For the very same reason, the judgments 
in Mohammed Arif Contractor (supra) and M/s Marudhar 
Construction (supra) can have no application to the present facts.
30.	 In the present case, the order appointing the Arbitrator read with the 
law laid down in SBP (supra), clearly operates as a res judicata, 
insofar as the existence of and validity of the arbitration agreement 
between the parties is concerned. In the SBP (supra) regime, this 
was the legal position.
31.	 SBP (supra) also puts the matter beyond any controversy by 
holding that not only will the parties be bound before the Arbitrator 
with regard to the finding on existence and validity of the arbitration 
agreement they will also be bound during the subsequent stages of 
the proceedings which will include the Section 34 application stage, 
the Section 37 appeal stage and before this Court. The Commercial 
Court had missed the conceptual distinction between “Precedent” 
and “Res judicata” and consequently fell into an error.
CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS: -
32.	 In view of what we have held hereinabove, the Commercial Court 
and the High Court clearly erred in going into the existence and 
validity of Clause 23 and pronouncing that the said clause was not 
an arbitration clause. We, accordingly, set aside the judgment of the 
High Court dated 20.02.2020 in D.B. Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No. 
2435 of 2019. The appeal stands allowed. The result will be that the 
proceedings before the Commercial Court in Arbitration Case No. 
221 of 2018 will stand set aside and the matter is remitted to the 
Commercial Court, Judge No.3, Jaipur for hearing Arbitration Case 
No. 221 of 2018 on grounds other than what has been concluded 
hereinabove. We say so for the reason that while allowing the Section 
34 application on the ground that Section 23 was not an arbitration 
clause, the Commercial Court recorded that the other objections 

26
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
were not considered. It is only fair that the matter should be remitted 
for consideration of the other objections. Considering the fact that 
the Award is of the year 2015, we direct the Commercial Court No. 
3 to dispose of Arbitration Case No. 221 of 2018 within a period of 
three months from the date of receipt of this judgment. Parties to 
bear their own costs.
FACTS IN CIVIL APPEAL ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE 
PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 8331 of 2021:-
33.	 Leave granted.
34.	 On 11.10.2007, the appellant was awarded work by the respondents 
for construction of the structure of 180 LIG skeleton flats (stilt + 10 
storey) at Sector 29, Pratap Nagar, Sanganer, Jaipur, Rajasthan and 
entered into a contract agreement bearing No. 207/2007-08. The 
contract was for a lump sum value of Rs.4,58,05,217.45. The date 
of commencement was agreed to be 20.10.2007 and completion 
was 19.07.2008. Additional work to the tune of Rs. 64,01,689/- was 
awarded. The appellant raised an Escalation Bill amounting to 
Rs.55,77,080/- under Clause 45 of the Agreement in order to recover 
the prices of labour and material which had arisen during the period 
of completion of the construction work. Since the Escalation Bill was 
not paid and also penalty levied of Rs.2.5 lakhs was not refunded 
and claiming that the respondents failed to constitute an empowered 
Standing Committee under Clause 23 of the Agreement, a Section 
11 application came to be filed. By an order of 23.05.2014, a learned 
Single Judge held that since indisputably the Committee constituted 
was not in terms of Clause 23, appointed Mr. Justice Anoop Chand 
Goyal (Retd.) as the sole Arbitrator. The sole Arbitrator entered upon 
the reference and passed an Award on 25.02.2016 directing refund 
of Rs. 2.50 lakhs as penalty and awarding escalation charge to 
the tune of Rs.5,09,468/-. Further interest @ 10% from 13.08.2010 
was awarded. Even though the Award was passed on 25.02.2016, 
the arbitral proceedings commenced before the commencement of 
the Amendment Act of 2015. Before the Arbitrator, the respondents 
contended that Clause 23 of the Agreement was not an arbitration 
clause. The arbitrator held that since the Section 11 application 
stood allowed, the Arbitral Tribunal cannot sit over the order of the 
High Court. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
27
M/s Eminent Colonizers Private Limited v.  
Rajasthan Housing Board and Ors.
35.	 The respondents filed a Section 34 application challenging the 
award. The Commercial Court, by relying on the judgments of 
the Rajasthan High Court in Mohd. Arif Contractor (Supra) and 
Marudhar Construction (Supra) held that Clause 23 was not an 
arbitration clause. In appeal before the High Court, the findings of 
the Commercial Court were confirmed. 
36.	 Our reasoning and conclusion in Civil Appeal arising out of Special 
Leave Petition (C) No. 8299 of 2021 fully applies to the present 
set of facts. Appling the same reasoning, the appeal would stand 
allowed. The order of the High Court dated 20.02.2020 in D.B. 
Civil Miscellaneous Appeal No. 796 of 2019 stands set aside. 
The consequence will be that the matter will stand remitted to the 
Commercial Court, Judge No.3, Jaipur in hearing Arbitration Case 
No. 114 of 2018 on grounds other than what has been concluded 
hereinabove. We say so for the reason that while allowing the Section 
34 application on the ground that Section 23 was not an arbitration 
clause, the Commercial Court recorded that the other objections are 
not considered. In view of our holding hereinabove, it is only fair that 
the matter should be remitted for consideration of other objections. 
Considering the fact that the Award is of the year 2016, we direct 
the Commercial Court No.3 to dispose of Arbitration Case No. 114 
of 2018 within a period of three months from the date of receipt of 
this judgment. Parties to bear their own costs.
37.	 Both the appeals are disposed of in the above terms.
Result of the case: Appeals disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
