[2026] 3 S.C.R. 103 : 2026 INSC 148
State of Odisha & Ors.
v.
Managing Committee of Namatara Girls High School
(Special Leave Petition (C) Diary No. 54941 of 2025)
09 February 2026
[Dipankar Datta and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the applications for condonation of delay 
in filing the special leave petition and condonation of delay in 
re-filing the same.
Headnotes†
Limitation Act, 1963 – Condonation of delay – Respondent-
Managing Committee of the School filed application for release 
of grant-in-aid – Tribunal allowed the application by directing 
the State and the Director to release grant-in-aid in favour of 
the teaching and non-teaching staff of the school – State filed 
appeal which was time-barred as also not accompanied by 
the certified copy of the impugned order – For a period of 8 
years, the State did not file the certified copy of the impugned 
order – High Court dismissed the appeal for failure to file the 
certified copy of the tribunal’s order – Thereafter, the State 
obtained the certified copy of the tribunal’s order and filed 
application seeking recall of the order by the High Court, 
alongwith the application for condonation of delay of 291 
days – High Court rejected the application for condonation of 
delay resulting in the application for recall being dismissed 
as time-barred – Challenge to:
Held: Condonation of delay cannot be claimed as a matter of right – 
It is entirely the discretion of the Court whether or not to condone 
delay – No cause, much less sufficient cause, has been shown 
for exercise of discretion in favour of the State of Odisha – Nature 
of explanation in the application for condonation of delay is such 
that with much ado, the proceedings could be closed – However, 
since the expression ‘sufficient cause’ employed by the legislature 
in s.5 is adequately elastic to enable the courts to apply the law in 
a meaningful manner which subserves the ends of justice and in 
view of the submission made, the matter was considered in some 

104
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
depth – State of Odisha utterly lethargic, tardy and indolent not only 
before the High Court but also before this Court – Notwithstanding 
that its appeal was dismissed as time-barred by the High Court, this 
Court was approached by the State of Odisha four months after 
expiry of the period of limitation – Despite all the latitude shown 
to a “State”, the cause sought to be shown here by the State of 
Odisha is not an explanation but a lame excuse – No case for 
exercise of discretion set up – Applications for condonation of delay 
in filing the special leave petition and condonation of delay in re-
filing the same, rejected, and the special leave petition dismissed 
as time-barred – Odisha Education Act, 1969. [Paras 12, 13, 20-22]
Case Law Cited
Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag v. Mst Katiji [1987] 2 SCR 
387 : (1987) 2 SCC 107; G. Ramegowda v. Land Acquisition Officer 
[1988] 3 SCR 198 : (1988) 2 SCC 142; Postmaster General v. 
Living Media India Limited [2012] 1 SCR 1045 : (2012) 3 SCC 
563; University of Delhi v. Union of India [2019] 16 SCR 1259 : 
(2020) 13 SCC 745; Pathapati Subba Reddy v. Collector(LA) 
[2024] 4 SCR 241 : (2024) 12 SCC 336; Sheo Raj Singh v. Union 
of India [2023] 13 SCR 743 : (2023) 10 SCC 531; Commissioner 
of Wealth Tax, Bombay v. Amateur Riders Club, Bombay (1994) 
Supp. 2 SCC 603 – referred to.
List of Acts
Odisha Education Act, 1969; Limitation Act, 1963.
List of Keywords
Condonation of delay in filing the special leave petition; Condonation 
of delay in re-filing; Release of grant-in-aid; Certified copy of the 
order; Recall of the order by High Court; Expression ‘sufficient 
cause’.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave Petition (C) 
Diary No. 54941 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.02.2025 and 26.04.2023 
of the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack in IA No. 126 of 2025 in 
FAO No. 582 of 2015, respectively

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
105
State of Odisha & Ors. v.  
Managing Committee of Namatara Girls High School
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Petitioner(s):
Ms. Sanjana Saddy, Ms. Shailja Singh.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Nagendra Kasana, Mahendra Kumar Sahoo, A Deb Kumar, 
Mrs. A Deepa, Mrs. Neeta Kasana, Mrs. Anjana Kasana, 
Binod Ch Sabat.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
Respondent-Managing Committee of Namatara Girls’ High School1 
had approached the State Education Tribunal2, Bhubaneswar, Odisha 
with an application3 under Section 24B of the Odisha Education Act, 
1969 for release of grant-in-aid.
2.	
By an order dated 30th December, 2013, the Tribunal allowed the 
application by directing the State of Odisha and the Director of 
Secondary Education, Odisha to release grant-in-aid in favour of the 
teaching and non-teaching staff of the school in the manner as directed.
3.	
The order dated 30th December, 2013 was carried in appeal4 by 
the State of Odisha before the High Court of Orissa at Cuttack5 on 
16th October, 2015. The appeal was time-barred. Not only that, the 
appeal was not accompanied by the certified copy of the impugned 
order. Since presentation of the appeal, for a period of 8 years to 
be precise, the State of Odisha had not filed the certified copy of 
the impugned order. By an order dated 26th April, 2023, the High 
Court dismissed the appeal citing failure to file the certified copy of 
the Tribunal’s order as the reason.
4.	
Stung by such order, the State of Odisha woke up from its slumber. 
It obtained the certified copy of the Tribunal’s order dated 30th 
December, 2013 on 13th February, 2024. A week later, the State of 
1	
school
2	
Tribunal
3	
G.I.A. Case No.623 of 2011
4	
FAO No. 582 of 2015
5	
High Court

106
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Odisha filed an application6 seeking recall of the order dated 26th 
April, 2023. Together with such application was filed an application 
for condonation of delay7 seeking condonation of 291 days’ delay. 
5.	
The application for condonation of delay was taken up for 
consideration by the High Court on 21st February, 2025. Having 
noted that the certified copy of the impugned order was filed only 
on 13th February, 2024, the High Court correctly observed that the 
appeal filed on 16th October, 2015 was inherently defective and the 
delay in presenting the appeal is in excess of 11 years. Considering 
the aforesaid position, the application for condonation of delay was 
rejected resulting in the application for recall being dismissed as 
time-barred. 
6.	
The order of the High Court dated 21st February, 2025 is challenged 
by the State of Odisha in this special leave petition. 
7.	
It is noted that there is a delay of 123 days in filing the special 
leave petition and a further delay of 96 days in re-filing the same 
after curing defects. In the application for condonation of delay8, the 
State of Odisha seeks to explain the delay by pleading as follows:
“3. It is submitted that the Petitioner on receipt of order 
of the Hon’ble High Court vide order dated 26.04.2023 
and order dated 21.02.2025 in F.A.O. No. 582 of 2015 
and in I.A. No. 126 of 2025 in F.A.O. No. 582 of 2015 the 
petitioner considered the matter and sent it to the law 
department opined that it is a fit case for filing the present 
SLP against the impugned judgements dated 26.04.2023 
and order dated 21.02.2025.
4. That the delay in filing the appeal was on account 
of procedural delay in obtaining approval from the 
higher authority. The delay caused is not deliberate and 
intentional.” 
8.	
Ms. Sanjana Saddy, learned counsel appearing for the State of 
Odisha, submits that the delay in presenting the special leave petition 
is not deliberate and having regard to the long line of decisions of 
6	
I.A. No.165 of 2024
7	
I.A. No.126 of 2025
8	
I.A No.34867 of 2026

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
107
State of Odisha & Ors. v.  
Managing Committee of Namatara Girls High School
this Court advocating a liberal approach when an authority under 
Article 12 of the Constitution is the petitioner seeking condonation 
of delay, she urges that the delay be condoned and this Court may 
direct the High Court to examine the challenge to the order dated 
30th December, 2013 of the Tribunal on merits, upon revival of the 
appeal.
9.	
We had, upon hearing Ms. Sanjana, started dictating an order of 
dismissal of the special leave petition. It was then that she prayed 
for withdrawal of the special leave petition. We had so recorded. 
However, when we were about to rise for the day, Ms. Sanjana 
prayed for recall of the order of dismissal of the special leave petition 
as withdrawn; she also submitted, on instructions, that the State 
of Odisha would invite a detailed order with reasons in support of 
dismissal of the special leave petition.
10.	 We recalled the order dismissing the special leave petition as 
withdrawn and, instead, dismissed the same as time-barred 
considering paragraphs 3 and 4 of the application for condonation 
of delay, excerpted above, with the observation that reasons would 
follow. 
11.	 We now proceed to assign our reasons. 
12.	 No cause, much less sufficient cause, has been shown for exercise of 
discretion in favour of the State of Odisha. The nature of explanation 
in the application for condonation of delay is such that with much 
ado, the proceedings could be closed. 
13.	 However, since there is a long line of decisions of this Court 
propounding the law that the expression ‘sufficient cause’ employed 
by the legislature in Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 is adequately 
elastic to enable the courts to apply the law in a meaningful manner 
which subserves the ends of justice and in view of the submission 
of Ms. Sanjana, we have considered it appropriate to consider the 
matter in some depth. 
14.	 Almost four decades back, in Collector, Land Acquisition, 
Anantnag v. Mst Katiji9, a coordinate Bench noting that the justifiably 
liberal approach which this Court has been adopting in matters 
9	
(1987) 2 SCC 107

108
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
instituted before it is not being followed by the courts lower in the 
hierarchy, mandated that a justice oriented approach is indeed called 
for when a ‘State’ seeks condonation of delay as distinguished from 
‘a private party’. 
15.	 Close on the heels of Katiji (supra), Hon’ble Justice M.N. 
Venkatachaliah speaking for the coordinate Bench in G. Ramegowda v. 
Land Acquisition Officer10 had referred to Katiji (supra) in paragraph 
14 and quoted the following passage therefrom:
“When substantial justice and technical considerations 
are pitted against each other, cause of substantial justice 
deserves to be preferred for the other side cannot claim 
to have vested right in injustice being done because of a 
non-deliberate delay …
It must be grasped that judiciary is respected not on 
account of its power to legalise injustice on technical 
grounds but because it is capable of removing injustice 
and is expected to do so.”
Immediately thereafter, in paragraphs 15 to 17, it was held as under: 
15. In litigations to which Government is a party there is 
yet another aspect which, perhaps, cannot be ignored. 
If appeals brought by Government are lost for such 
defaults, no person is individually affected; but what, in the 
ultimate analysis, suffers is public interest. The decisions 
of Government are collective and institutional decisions 
and do not share the characteristics of decisions of private 
individuals.
16. The law of limitation is, no doubt, the same for a private 
citizen as for governmental authorities. Government, like 
any other litigant must take responsibility for the acts 
or omissions of its officers. But a somewhat different 
complexion is imparted to the matter where Government 
makes out a case where public interest was shown to 
have suffered owing to acts of fraud or bad faith on the 
part of its officers or agents and where the officers were 
clearly at cross-purposes with it.
10	
(1988) 2 SCC 142

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
109
State of Odisha & Ors. v.  
Managing Committee of Namatara Girls High School
17. Therefore, in assessing what, in a particular case, 
constitutes “sufficient cause” for purposes of Section 5, it 
might, perhaps, be somewhat unrealistic to exclude from 
the considerations that go into the judicial verdict, these 
factors which are peculiar to and characteristic of the 
functioning of the government. Governmental decisions 
are proverbially slow encumbered, as they are, by a 
considerable degree of procedural red tape in the process 
of their making. A certain amount of latitude is, therefore, 
not impermissible. It is rightly said that those who bear 
responsibility of Government must have “a little play at the 
joints”. Due recognition of these limitations on governmental 
functioning — of course, within reasonable limits — is 
necessary if the judicial approach is not to be rendered 
unrealistic. It would, perhaps, be unfair and unrealistic to 
put government and private parties on the same footing 
in all respects in such matters. Implicit in the very nature 
of governmental functioning is procedural delay incidental 
to the decision-making process. In the opinion of the High 
Court, the conduct of the law officers of the Government 
placed the Government in a predicament and that it was 
one of those cases where the mala fides of the officers 
should not be imputed to Government. It relied upon and 
trusted its law officers. …
16.	 Katiji (supra) and Ramegowda (supra) were consistently followed by 
this Court until adoption of a different and seemingly strict approach 
while dealing with applications for condonation of delay during the 
last decade and a half became discernible starting with the decision 
in Postmaster General v. Living Media India Limited11, where a 
delay of 427 days in filing the relevant special leave petition was 
not condoned. University of Delhi v. Union of India12 is another 
decision (of a three-Judge Bench of this Court) where delay of 
916 days was not condoned. While upholding the decision of the 
relevant high court under challenge refusing to condone the delay 
of 5659 days in presentation of an appeal under Section 54 of the 
11	
(2012) 3 SCC 563
12	
(2020) 13 SCC 745

110
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Land Acquisition Act, 1894 by the heirs of a deceased landowner, 
a coordinate Bench in Pathapati Subba Reddy v. Collector(LA)13 
very recently reiterated that the law of limitation is founded on public 
policy, the object is that a legal remedy is put to an end so that no 
litigation remains pending for an indefinite period. It was also held, 
departing from the earlier view, that the merits of the case cannot be 
considered at the stage of considering the application for condonation 
of delay.
17.	 Indeed, one of us [Dipankar Datta] in Sheo Raj Singh v. Union of 
India14 authoring the judgment for a coordinate Bench adopted the 
view taken in Katiji (supra), Ramegowda (supra) and a host of other 
decisions following the same while not interfering with an order of 
condonation of delay passed by the relevant high court. However, 
it was observed that a distinction ought to be drawn between an 
‘explanation’ and an ‘excuse’ that is proffered as cause for condonation 
of delay. It was also emphasized that a different approach has to be 
adopted while this Court is considering an application for condonation 
of delay in presentation of an appeal/application and when it sits 
in appeal over a discretionary order of the high court granting the 
prayer for condonation of delay. In the case of the former, whether 
to condone or not would be the only question whereas in the latter, 
whether there has been proper exercise of discretion in favour of 
grant of the prayer for condonation has to be examined.
18.	 However, what perhaps remained unnoticed in any of the decisions 
post Katiji (supra) and Ramegowda (supra) adopting a liberal 
approach is the exasperation and consequent lament expressed 
by none other than Hon’ble M.N. Venkatachaliah, CJI. in course of 
authoring a brief order in Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Bombay v. 
Amateur Riders Club, Bombay15 and admonishing officers of the 
“revenue” in not acting with promptitude. This order was made within 
six years of the decision in Ramegowda (supra). We can do no 
better than quoting the same in its entirety hereunder:
1. We have heard Shri S.C. Manchanda, learned senior 
counsel for the Revenue.
13	
(2024) 12 SCC 336
14	
(2023) 10 SCC 531
15	
(1994) Supp. 2 SCC 603

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
111
State of Odisha & Ors. v.  
Managing Committee of Namatara Girls High School
2. This special leave petition filed on November 16, 1993 
is delayed by 264 days. For quite some time in the past, 
this Court has been making observations as to the grave 
prejudice caused to public interest by appeals brought 
on behalf of the Government being lost on the point of 
limitation. Such observations have been made for over a 
few years in the past. But there seems to be no conspicuous 
improvement as is apparent in the present petition which 
is filed in November 1993. The explanation for the delay, 
had better be set out in petitioner’s own words:
“(g) The Advocate-on-Record got the special leave 
petition drafted from the drafting Advocate and sent 
the same for approval to the Board on June 24, 1993 
along with the case file.
(h) The Board returned the case file to the Advocate-
on-Record on July 9, 1993 who re-sent the same to 
the Board on September 20, 1993 requesting that 
draft SLP was not approved by the Board. The Board 
after approving the draft SLP sent this file to CAS 
on October 1, 1993.”
3. This explanation is incapable of furnishing a judicially 
acceptable ground for condonation of delay. After the 
earlier observations of this Court made in several cases in 
the past, we hoped that the matters might improve. There 
seems to be no visible support for this optimism. There is 
a point beyond which even the courts cannot help a litigant 
even if the litigant is Government which is itself under the 
shackles of bureaucratic indifference. Having regard to the 
law of limitation which binds everybody, we cannot find any 
way of granting relief. It is true that Government should not 
be treated as any other private litigant as, indeed, in the 
case of the former the decisions to present and prosecute 
appeals are not individual but are institutional decisions 
necessarily bogged down by the proverbial red-tape. But 
there are limits to this also. Even with all this latitude, the 
explanation offered for the delay in this case merely serves 
to aggravate the attitude of indifference of the Revenue 
in protecting its common interests. The affidavit is again 
one of the stereotyped affidavits making it susceptible to 
the criticism that the Revenue does not seem to attach 

112
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
any importance to the need for promptitude even where 
it affects its own interest.
4. The application for condonation of delay is, accordingly, 
dismissed. The special leave petition is, therefore, 
dismissed as barred by time.
(emphasis ours)
19.	 Reading Ramegowda (supra) and Amateur Riders (supra), one after 
the other, leaves none in doubt that it did not take much time for this 
Court to lose hope. It is absolutely clear that the law was laid down 
in Ramegowda (supra), following Katiji (supra), with much optimism 
that matters would improve. Their Lordships, however, found no visible 
support for such optimism and the Court’s patience having been 
tested to the extreme limit, held that there is a point beyond which 
even the courts cannot help a litigant even if the litigant labouring 
under the shackles of bureaucratic indifference is the Government.
20.	 We have found the State of Odisha to be utterly lethargic, tardy and 
indolent not only before the High Court but also before this Court. 
Notwithstanding that its appeal was dismissed as time-barred by the 
High Court, this Court has been approached by the State of Odisha 
four months after expiry of the period of limitation. 
21.	 Condonation of delay cannot be claimed as a matter of right. It 
is entirely the discretion of the Court whether or not to condone 
delay. Despite all the latitude that is shown to a “State”, we are of 
the clear opinion that the cause sought to be shown here by the 
State of Odisha is not an explanation but a lame excuse. No case 
for exercise of discretion has been set up.
22.	 The applications for condonation of delay in filing the special leave 
petition and condonation of delay in re-filing the same, thus, stand 
rejected, with the result that the special leave petition stands dismissed 
as time-barred.
Result of the case: Special Leave Petition dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
