[2026] 3 S.C.R. 231 : 2026 INSC 162
Rohit Jangde
v.
The State of Chhattisgarh
(Criminal Appeal No. 689 of 2026)
17 February 2026
[Sanjay Kumar and K. Vinod Chandran,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, there was a 
complete chain of circumstances leading only to the hypothesis of the 
guilt of the accused without leaving room for any other hypothesis; 
whether the order of the Trial Court convicting the accused and 
that of the High Court affirming the same ought to be set aside.
Headnotes†
Evidence Act, 1872 – s.27 – Statement of accused made when 
not in police custody, outside the purview of s.27 – High Court 
affirmed the conviction and sentence of the accused, the 
step-father for the murder of his six year-old step-daughter on 
the basis of the last seen together theory; the ashes and the 
bony remnants from the charred remains of the child having 
been recovered on the information supplied by the accused; 
the skull and teeth recovered from a canal having tallied with 
the sample DNA profile of the biological parents of the girl 
child – Interference with:
Held: Order of the Trial Court convicting the accused and that of 
the High Court affirming the same are set aside – On facts, the 
last seen together theory fails miserably – Recovery allegedly 
made u/s.27 is also fraught with inconsistencies – s.27 speaks 
of information received from a person accused of any offence 
while in the custody of the police leading to a discovery of a fact 
being enabled of proof in the trial – The accused at the time of 
the statement was not in the custody of the police and hence it is 
removed from the ambit of s.27 – What has been established beyond 
doubt is only the death of the child whose vertebrae and teeth, 
recovered from a canal, matched with the DNA profiles obtained 
from the sample taken from the biological parents – The knowledge 
* Author

232
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the accused, which led to the detection of the bone remnants 
though not acceptable u/s.27 would all the same be acceptable 
evidence u/s.8, which by itself is a weak piece of evidence – The 
evidence u/s.8 can only offer corroboration and cannot by itself 
result in a conviction – The suspicion regarding the earlier arrest 
and incarceration of the accused also would pose serious difficulty 
in finding a hypothesis of guilt beyond all reasonable doubt – The 
long gap when there was no complaint made about the missing 
child and the factum of none having questioned the accused, 
despite the family and police having been told that she went with 
the accused tilts the scales in favour of the accused; especially 
since he was released on 08.10.2018, two days before the FIR 
was lodged – Moreover, since the corpus delicti was not recovered, 
there is no time of death specified – Benefit of doubt given to the 
accused – Acquitted. [Paras 10, 12, 18, 19]
Evidence Act, 1872 – ss.27, 8:
Held: There is nothing indicated to show that the accused, who had 
accompanied his wife to register the missing complaint was even 
suspected of being responsible for the missing of the child – In any 
event, this does not pose any difficulty insofar as the deposition 
of the I.O, PW 15; that he was led to the field and the canal from 
where the recovery was made, subsequent to which the person 
was arrested, though not admissible u/s.27, all the same can be 
brought u/s.8 – The recovery of the bone remnants having been 
made at the instance of the accused accepted, though at the time 
of his statement, he was not in police custody, which could only 
be a link u/s.8, in the chain of circumstances; but his connection 
with the crime still has to be proved otherwise – The DNA profiles 
matched only with the piece of vertebrae and the teeth recovered 
from the canal, while the skull and those recovered from the field, 
where the body is said to have been burnt, did not match with the 
samples taken from the parents – Also, the bones recovered were 
wrapped in a green saree of PW7, which was not attempted to 
be identified as belonging to her, by confronting the same to the 
witness, while she was in the box.[Paras 14-16]
Evidence Act, 1872 – s.27 – ‘custody’ – Meaning:
Held: Expression ‘custody’ appearing in s.27 does not mean 
formal custody and includes any kind of surveillance, restriction 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
233
Rohit Jangde v. The State of Chhattisgarh
or restraint by the police – Even if there is no formal arrest made, 
if a person is within the ken of surveillance of the police, during 
which his movements are restricted, then it can be regarded as 
custodial surveillance – In the present case, though the recoveries 
as per Exts. P3 & P5 Memos were made, in accordance with 
the confession statement of the accused, Ext. P4 at 10.30 on 
13.10.2018, the Arrest/Court Surrender Memo produced at Ex.P27, 
indicates the arrest of the accused having been made on 13.10.2018 
at 22.00 hrs. [Paras 10, 13]
Case Law Cited
Jaffar Hussain Dastagir v. State of Maharashtra [1970] 2 SCR 
332 : (1969) 2 SCC 872; Dharam Deo Yadav v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh [2014] 8 SCR 650 : (2014) 5 SCC 509; State of A.P. v. 
Gangula Satya Murthy [1996] Supp. 8 SCR 808 : (1997) 1 SCC 
272; Ramkishan Mithanlal Sharma v. State of Bombay [1955] 1 
SCR 903 : (1954) 2 SCC 516 – referred to.
Durlav Namasudra v. Emperor, 1931 SCC Online Cal 
146 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Evidence Act, 1872.
List of Keywords
Botched investigation; Step-father; Murder of step-daughter; Last 
seen together theory; Section 27, Evidence Act, 1872; Ashes and the 
bony remnants; Charred remains; Information supplied by accused; 
Skull and teeth recovered from a canal; Sample DNA profile of 
the biological parents of the girl child; Interpolation; Matching 
of DNA profiles of the bone remnants with the DNA profiles of 
biological parents of deceased child; Missing child; Corpus delicti 
not recovered; No time of death specified; Benefit of doubt; Last 
seen together theory failed; ‘custody’.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
689 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 30.11.2023 of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in CRA No. 873 of 2021

234
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Dr. Rajesh Pandey, Sr. Adv., Chandrika Prasad Mishra, 
Ms. Prashasti Singh, Ms. Ayushi Pandey, Utsav Madan, Ms. Swati 
Surbhi.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Ankita Sharma, Arjun D. Singh, Ms. Ishika Neogi, Divya Tripathi.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
K. Vinod Chandran, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
A botched investigation leaves many questions unanswered and in 
the present case, the murder of a six-year-old girl went unpunished 
and her stepfather was incarcerated on mere conjectures. The 
impugned judgment of the High Court affirmed the conviction and 
sentence of the accused, the stepfather, on three circumstances. 
One, the last seen together theory propounded through a neighbour. 
Then, the ashes and the bony remnants from the charred remains 
of the child, having been recovered on the information supplied by 
the accused. And last, the skull and teeth recovered from a canal 
having tallied with the sample DNA profile of the biological parents 
of the girl child, establishing death unequivocally. The High Court 
also emphasized the aspect of no explanation having been offered 
by the accused regarding his knowledge of the location from which 
the bony remnants of the deceased were recovered; an incriminating 
circumstance under Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
Whether these factors would form a complete chain of circumstances 
leading only to the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused without 
leaving room for any other hypothesis, is the question arising herein.
3.	
We have heard Dr. Rajesh Pandey, learned Senior Counsel appearing 
for the accused and Ms. Ankita Sharma, Advocate-on-Record, 
appearing for the State. We cannot but appreciate the Government 
Advocate for undertaking the exercise of preparing, for our perusal, 
a paper-book containing the entire records, both the vernacular 
and the translation. The hearing on the earlier occasion also raised 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
235
Rohit Jangde v. The State of Chhattisgarh
serious questions as to the custody of the accused, prior to the 
arrest in the present crime, which persuaded us to pass an order 
on 14.11.2025, directing the State to produce proof, if any, of the 
accused having been taken into custody and imprisoned between 
05.10.2025 to 10.10.2025. An additional affidavit dated 08.12.2025, 
filed by the State in compliance of our order, producing an arrest/
Court surrender memo adds to the confusion, making the truth 
regarding the crime, further elusive.
4.	
On facts suffice it to notice that the accused was living with his 
two wives and three children. One of the children was born to the 
accused from his first wife and the two children of his second wife 
(PW7) were from her previous marriage with PW17. On 05.10.2018, 
a quarrel broke out between the accused and PW7, in which PW7 
was physically assaulted. This prompted her to leave her marital 
home and proceed to the home of her parents. PW7 was admitted 
to a hospital and on her request, her mother PW2 went to her 
daughter’s marital home to pick up the grandchildren. She was, 
however, informed by the first wife of the accused that the accused 
had taken the younger child. There was no attempt to find out the 
missing child and a missing complaint was registered on 11.10.2018 
at 13.20 hrs at Sahaspur Lohara Police Station in District Kabirdhan. 
Later, allegedly on the confession statement of the accused under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act, on 13.10.2018, the accused is said 
to have led the police party to a field from where some burnt bones 
and ashes were recovered and from a nearby canal a skull and 
some bones, covered in a green saree were recovered.
5.	
PW1, the doctor before whom the bone remnants were produced, 
suggested a chemical examination of the remains, which was carried 
out under the supervision of PW18, the Senior Scientific Officer. The 
FSL report marked as Annexure P21A indicated that the DNA profile 
of the sample taken from PW7 and PW17, the biological parents of 
the deceased child, matched with the DNA profiles of the vertebrae 
and teeth recovered from the canal; the skull having not matched, 
on analysis. PW8, a neighbor of the accused was also examined 
to show that the accused had taken the child from the house on a 
motor bike allegedly establishing the last seen together theory. Thus, 
the circumstances, of the recovery made, the last seen together 
theory projected and the matching of the DNA profiles, led to the 
conviction of the accused.

236
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
6.	
Learned Senior Counsel for the accused on the previous hearing 
date specifically argued that on 05.10.2018, alleging an assault on 
PW7 an FIR was registered which led to the arrest of the accused on 
05.10.2018 itself, after which he was released from judicial custody 
only on 08.10.2018. We have looked at the additional affidavit filed, 
which indicates that the accused was arrested on 06.10.2018 and 
remanded to judicial custody by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate; the 
accused having been released from the District Jail, Kabirdham on 
08.10.2018 as per the bail order of the Sub-Divisional Magistrate. 
Having gone through Annexure 2, the Arrest/Court Surrender Memo 
produced along with the affidavit, we have serious doubts on when 
the arrest occurred. There is clear interpolation in the date and 
though at column No. 8, of the FIR, the arrest is shown to have 
been carried out on 06.10.2018 at 13.40 hrs, in Column No.2 the 
date and time have been changed from 05.10.2018 and 12.40 to 
06 or 08.10.2018 and 13.40. The interpolation on the date is very 
clear from the documents produced which raises a reasonable doubt 
as to the arrest of the accused, which could have been at 12.40 
hrs on 05.10.2018, seriously hampering the last seen theory as 
projected by the prosecution. Be that as it may, we will first examine 
the evidence led at the trial keeping in mind the principle that every 
faulty investigation will not inure to the benefit of the accused unless 
serious prejudice is caused thereby and the evidence led is not 
sufficient to arrive at a finding of guilt, unequivocally.
7.	
PW2, mother-in-law of the accused spoke about the quarrel between 
her daughter and the accused and her daughter’s admission to the 
hospital for treatment. She also deposed that she had gone to the 
house of the accused along with the police, to fetch the grandchildren, 
when the first wife of the accused informed her that the accused had 
taken away the second child. Pertinently we have to observe that in 
chief-examination there is no date mentioned and the whereabouts 
of the first child of her daughter, who also was staying along with the 
accused, has not at all been disclosed. PW10, the husband of PW2, 
who accompanied her to the house of the accused fully corroborated 
the version of PW2 but again without any date mentioned and also 
the whereabouts of the first child.
8.	
In any event, even going by the version of the State, the accused 
was arrested on 06.10.2018 and released only on 08.10.2018. This 
has been fully corroborated by PW15, the I.O who spoke of the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
237
Rohit Jangde v. The State of Chhattisgarh
arrest of the accused on 06.10.2018, his remand and later release on 
08.10.2018. The last seen theory as projected through PW8 indicates 
that the child was taken away by the accused, in which circumstance, 
the crime ought to have occurred on 05.10.2018 or before the arrest 
of the accused on 06.10.2018. Despite the child having not been 
found, PW2, PW7 and PW10 did not register any case of missing, 
and an FIR was first registered on 11.10.2018, when PW7 along 
with the accused came to the Police Station and registered an FIR 
regarding the missing child. This assumes relevance especially since 
the incident of assault was reported to the police, who accompanied 
PW2 to the house of the accused on the same day, when they were 
told that the child went with the accused.
9.	
The accused having been arrested, even accepting the version of 
the Police, on 06.10.2018, it is strange that no enquiries were made 
about the missing child. Further the missing complaint is said to have 
been registered much later on 11.10.2018. The First Information 
Statement (FIS) by the Sub-Inspector of Sahaspur Lohara Police 
Station is on information supplied by PW2 who was accompanied by 
her husband. The oral report spoken of in the FIS was that the six-
year-old child went missing at 09.00 P.M. on 06.10.2018, obviously 
after the accused was arrested. These aspects as borne out from the 
records puts to peril the prosecution story of the last seen together 
theory as projected through PW8. PW8 a neighbor of the accused 
also deposed before Court that she volunteered this information 
to the Police, seven days after 05.10.2018; when already the said 
aspect was known to the mother and grandparents of the deceased 
child as also the Police, by virtue of the information supplied by the 
first wife of the accused on 05.10.2018 itself. The last seen together 
theory hence fails miserably.
10.	 Now we come to the recovery allegedly made under Section 27, 
which is also fraught with inconsistencies as we would presently 
indicate. The memorandum under Section 27 of the Evidence Act 
produced as Ex. P4 indicates the same having been drawn up on 
13.10.2018 at 10.30 A.M. The only admissible portion in the said 
memorandum is : ‘I will show you the place... where her bones and 
ashes are and the place where her skull and bones were..’(sic). The 
police were led by the accused first to a field from where bones with 
ashes were recovered at 10.55 A.M evidenced by Property Seizure 
Memo Ex.P5. The canal was searched by three fishermen PW 3 to 

238
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
PW 5 who recovered the skull with 8 numbers of tooth of the upper 
jaw and a piece of bone wrapped in a green color saree, all of which 
showed evidence of burning as indicated in Ex.P3 Property Seizure 
Memo at 13.00 on 13.10.2018. Though the recoveries as per Exts. 
P3 & P5 Memos were made, in accordance with the confession 
statement of the accused, Ext. P4 at 10.30 on 13.10.2018, the Arrest/
Court Surrender Memo produced at Ex.P27, indicates the arrest of 
the accused having been made on 13.10.2018 at 22.00 hrs. Section 
27 of the Evidence Act clearly speaks of information received from 
a person accused of any offence while in the custody of the police 
leading to a discovery of a fact being enabled of proof in the trial. 
The accused at the time of the statement was not in the custody 
of the police and hence it is removed from the ambit of Section 27.
11.	 Section 27, as has been held in Jaffar Hussain Dastagir v. State 
of Maharashtra1, is in effect a proviso to Section 26 which makes 
admissible so much of the statement of the accused deposed to by 
him, leading to the discovery of the fact deposed and connected 
with the crime, irrespective of the question whether it is confessional 
or otherwise. The essential ingredient of the provision is that the 
information given by the accused must lead to the discovery of a 
fact which is the direct outcome of such information. Secondly only 
such portion of the information given as is distinctly connected with 
the said recovery is admissible against the accused. Thirdly, the 
discovery of the fact must relate to the commission of the offence 
alleged. 
12.	 A similar situation, as in this case arose before the Calcutta High 
Court in Durlav Namasudra v. Emperor2 wherein the information 
which led to the discovery of the dead body had been given by 
the accused before they were taken into custody. It was held that 
Section 27 controls Section 24 to 26 and the first thing that is to be 
ascertained before its application is whether the information came 
from a person who was in the custody of the police. It was held that 
if information came from a person who was not in the custody of 
the police, then it cannot be brought under Section 27. The Chief 
Justice passed a concurring judgment but expressed anguish insofar 
1	
(1969) 2 SCC 872
2	
1931 SCC Online Cal 146

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
239
Rohit Jangde v. The State of Chhattisgarh
as Section 27 permitted reliance on a statement made to the police 
which leads to the discovery of a fact, only when the person who 
gave the information is in custody, which was also observed to be 
absurd in terms. However, it was also held that till the legislature 
takes the matter in hand and redrafts the provision, the paradox 
expressed would continue to be law.
13.	 The position is somewhat clarified in Dharam Deo Yadav v. State 
of Uttar Pradesh3, which dealt with the murder of a foreign national 
by a tourist guide. The I.O having received information that the guide 
was arriving by a train rushed to the railway station and intercepted 
him in the platform. On interrogation it was confessed by the accused 
that he had murdered the victim and the dead body was buried in 
his house. The I.O thus was led to the house of the accused from 
where the accused dug up the skeleton which later was proved to be 
of the victim. It was held that the expression ‘custody’ appearing in 
Section 27 does not mean formal custody and includes any kind of 
surveillance, restriction or restraint by the police. It was held, relying 
on State of A.P. v. Gangula Satya Murthy4 that even if there is no 
formal arrest made, if a person is within the ken of surveillance of 
the police, during which his movements are restricted, then it can 
be regarded as custodial surveillance. It was also held by this Court 
that even if the recovery of the skeleton was not in terms of Section 
27, on the premise that the accused was not in the custody of the 
police while the statement was made, it would be admissible as 
‘conduct under Section 8 of the Act’. In that case there was absolutely 
no explanation by the accused for the skeleton found buried in his 
own house.
14.	 In the present case, the FIR was registered on 11.10.2018 at 13.20 
hours and the so-called Section 27 statement was recorded at 10.30 
on 13.10.2018, after which the recoveries were made and the arrest 
carried out later in the night of the 13th. There is nothing indicated to 
show that the accused, who had accompanied his wife to register 
the missing complaint was even suspected of being responsible 
for the missing of the child. In any event, this does not pose any 
difficulty insofar as the deposition of the I.O, PW 15; that he was 
3	
(2014) 5 SCC 509
4	
(1997) 1 SCC 272

240
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
led to the field and the canal from where the recovery was made, 
subsequent to which the person was arrested, though not admissible 
under Section 27, all the same can be brought under Section 8 of 
the Evidence Act. 
15.	 Apposite also would be a reference to Ramkishan Mithanlal 
Sharma v. State of Bombay5. The charge therein was of commission 
of dacoity using deadly weapons. The I.O deposed before Court that 
on information supplied by the first accused, he reached the location 
where he asked one Bali Ram to dig out a tin box from the mud floor 
of a house pointed out by the first accused leading to recovery of 
three revolvers and live cartridges. Since the I.O did not depose on 
the specific information passed on by the first accused, it was held 
that the operation of Section 27 though not attracted, prima facie there 
was nothing to prevent that evidence being admitted against the first 
accused. We extract herewith paragraph 33 of the cited decision:
“33. The evidence of the police officer would no doubt 
go to show that the accused knew of the existence of 
the fact discovered in consequence of information given 
by him. But that would not necessarily show his direct 
connection with the offence. It would merely be a link in 
the chain of evidence which taken along with other pieces 
of evidence might go to establish his connection therewith. 
This circumstance would therefore be quite innocuous, 
and evidence could certainly be given of that circumstance 
without attracting the operation of Section 27.”
[underlining by us for emphasis]
Hence, we are persuaded to accept the recovery of the bone remnants 
having been made at the instance of the accused, though at the 
time of his statement, he was not in police custody, which could 
only be a link under Section 8 of the Evidence Act, in the chain 
of circumstances; but his connection with the crime still has to be 
proved otherwise.
16.	 The next circumstance projected by the prosecution is the matching 
of the DNA profiles of the bone remnants with the DNA profiles of 
5	
(1954) 2 SCC 516

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
241
Rohit Jangde v. The State of Chhattisgarh
the biological parents of the deceased child. We have to specifically 
notice that the DNA profiles matched only with the piece of vertebrae 
and the teeth recovered from the canal, while the skull and those 
recovered from the field, where the body is said to have been burnt, 
did not match with the samples taken from the parents. In this context, 
we also have to notice that the bones recovered were wrapped in 
a green saree of PW7, which was not attempted to be identified as 
belonging to her, by confronting the same to the witness, while she 
was in the box.
17.	 The learned Senior Counsel for the accused also argued that the 
matching of the DNA samples was not put to the accused in the 
Section 313 questioning. PW18 was the Scientific Officer who spoke 
of the samples having matched with the DNA profiles of the bone and 
teeth remnants taken from the canal. Question No. 157 specifically 
was with respect to the blood samples of the mother and father of 
the deceased having been marked as C1 and C2. Question No. 158 
spoke of Ex.A (specifically A-02) and Ex.B DNA profiles and that the 
alleles were found matching with the DNA profile of Ex.C. Question 
No. 159 specifically informed the accused of the vertebrae having 
been marked as A2 and subjected to DNA testing. We are of the 
opinion that question numbers 157 to 159 informed the accused 
about the matching of the DNA profiles which was responded to by 
a bland denial.
18.	 As of now, we are faced with only two circumstances, the knowledge 
of the accused regarding the place from which the bone remnants 
of the child were recovered and the matching of some of it with the 
DNA profiles of the biological parents of the child. What has been 
established beyond doubt is only the death of the child whose 
vertebrae and teeth, recovered from a canal, matched with the DNA 
profiles obtained from the sample taken from the biological parents. 
The knowledge of the accused, which led to the detection of the 
bone remnants though not acceptable under Section 27 would all 
the same be acceptable evidence under Section 8, which by itself 
is a weak piece of evidence. The evidence under Section 8 can 
only offer corroboration and cannot by itself result in a conviction. 
The suspicion regarding the earlier arrest and incarceration of the 
accused also would pose serious difficulty in finding a hypothesis 
of guilt beyond all reasonable doubt. The long gap when there was 
no complaint made about the missing child and the factum of none 

242
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
having questioned the accused, despite the family and police having 
been told that she went with the accused tilts the scales in favour 
of the accused; especially since he was released on 08.10.2018, 
two days before the FIR was lodged. Pertinent also is that since the 
corpus delicti was not recovered, there is no time of death specified. 
We are hence unable to uphold the conviction of the accused, and 
he has to be necessarily given the benefit of doubt. 
19.	 The Appeal is allowed. The order of the Trial Court convicting the 
accused and that of the High Court affirming the same are set aside. 
The accused shall be released forthwith, if not wanted in any other 
case.
20.	 Before we leave the matter, we cannot but record our appreciation 
for the meticulous preparation of the learned Government Advocate 
who, with astute vigor addressed arguments despite the major pitfalls 
in investigation. We cannot but observe that if the investigation had 
been half as good as the preparation of the State Counsel, the 
shroud of mystery over the poor child’s disappearance and death, 
could have been unravelled. We also appreciate the efforts put in by 
the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant, in probing the State to 
effectively bring forth the inept handling of the investigation.
21.	 Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
