[2026] 3 S.C.R. 125 : 2026 INSC 151
Zubair. P
v.
State of Kerala & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 1620 of 2026)
13 February 2026
[K.V. Viswanathan and Vipul M. Pancholi,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose for consideration whether r.6(2)(24)(iii) of Chapter 
XXXII of the Kerala Education Rules mandates that the State 
Eligibility Test-SET qualification must be in the concerned subject 
only for appointment as Higher Secondary School Teachers-HSST 
or in any subject would suffice for eligibility, and if so, whether the 
appellant satisfies the said requirement or qualifies for exemption 
u/r.10(4) of Chapter XXXII of the Rules.
Headnotes†
Kerala Education Rules – Chapter XXXII, r.6(2)(24)(iii) – 
Interpretation – Essential qualifications for appointment as 
Higher Secondary School Teachers-HSST – Appellant having 
Bachelor’s degree and Master’s degree in Economics, B.Ed. 
in Social Sciences and State Eligibility Test-SET qualification 
in Malayalam appointed as Higher Secondary School Teacher-
HSST (Economics) by competent authority– Respondent-
authorities declined to approve the appointment of the appellant 
as HSST (Economics) on the ground that the appellant neither 
had the requisite SET qualification in Economics nor had ten 
years of experience as a High School Teacher to avail the 
exemption of mandatory SET qualification in the concerned 
subject – Writ petition by the appellant seeking quashing of 
the order and direction to respondent-authorities to approve 
his appointment as HSST – Single Judge dismissed the 
petition and declared that the appellant was not qualified for 
appointment to the post of HSST (Economics) and directed 
the authorities to consider the claim of respondent no. 4 for 
appointment as HSST (Economics) if found entitled – Upheld 
by the Division Bench – Correctness:
* Author

126
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: When r.6.2(24)(iii) is read with the prospectus of the SET 
examination, particularly Clause 2 of the prospectus, it can be 
safely said that the candidate is required to pass SET in the 
concerned subject to qualify for the appointment to the post of 
HSST in the said concerned subject – Even though in r.6.2(24)
(iii), the words “in the concerned subject” are missing, the said 
Rule cannot be interpreted in isolation and the textual omission 
has to be inferred from context, purpose and scheme of the 
provision – Thus, the said clause is required to be interpreted in 
the said manner and possession of SET qualification in any other 
subject unrelated to the teaching post, does not suffice the statutory 
eligibility criteria – Concerned candidate is required to pass SET 
in the concerned subject – Appellant, though having Bachelor’s 
Degree as well as Master’s Degree in Economics, passed SET 
in Malayalam, whereas, respondent no. 4 is having the degrees 
of Bachelor’s and Master’s in Economics as well as the SET 
qualification in Economics – Thus, respondent no. 4 is fulfilling all 
the required eligibility criteria including the SET qualification in the 
concerned subject – Also, the appellant has completed 09 years 
10 months and 14 days service, i.e., less than ten years which is 
the minimum prescribed by the Rules and, thus, the appellant not 
entitled to seek an exemption u/r.10(4) of Chapter XXXII – Thus, 
the High Court did not commit any error in affirming the decision 
of the Single Judge, wherein it was declared that the appellant 
is not qualified for appointment to the post of HSST (Economics) 
in a vacancy that arose in the concerned school and respondent 
no. 4 is eligible for appointment as HSST (Economics) in the 
school w.e.f. 01.06.2021, with all consequential benefits, if found 
entitled. [Paras 25-27]
Case Law Cited
Union of India v. Pushpa Rani [2008] 11 SCR 440 : (2008) 9 SCC 
242; Kunjunjamma v. State of Kerala (2015) 11 SCC 440; Reserve 
Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. 
Ltd. [1987] 2 SCR 1 : (1987) 1 SCC 424 – referred to.
Geetha v. State of Kerala, 2012 (1) KLT 829; Manager, MPVHS 
School v. Girija (2003) 1 KLT 935 – referred to.
List of Acts
Kerala Education Rules, 1959; Constitution of India.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
127
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
List of Keywords
State Eligibility Test-SET qualification; Appointment as Higher 
Secondary School Teacher-HSST(Economics); Essential 
qualifications for appointment as Higher Secondary School 
Teachers-HSST; Bachelor’s degree in Economics; Master’s degree 
in Economics; B.Ed. in Social Sciences; State Eligibility Test-SET 
qualification in Malayalam; High School Teacher; Mandatory SET 
qualification; Purposive and harmonious interpretation of the statute.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1620 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 18.07.2024 of the High Court 
of Kerala at Ernakulam in WA No. 733 of 2024
With
Civil Appeal No. 1621 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Nikhil Goel, Sr. Adv., Haris Beeran, Azhar Assees, Anand B. Menon, 
Ms. Rizwana R. Raj, Shaswat Jena, Radha Shyam Jena.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Harshad V. Hameed, Dileep Poolakkot, Ms. Ashly Harshad, Mahabir 
Singh, Dr. Arunender Thakur, Anshul Saharan, Zulfiker Ali P.S., 
Augustine Peter, Faisal M. Aboobacker, Shifaz R. Dheen, Ms. 
Lebina Baby, Ms. Anne Mathew, P.S. Sudheer, Rishi Maheshwari, 
Bharat Sood, Jai Govind M.J., Jashan Vir Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Vipul M. Pancholi, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Both these appeals are preferred by the appellant, challenging the 
common impugned judgment and order dated 18.07.2024 passed 
by the Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala in Writ Appeal No. 

128
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
733 of 2024 and Writ Appeal No. 769 of 2024, whereby the High 
Court affirmed the rejection of approval to the appointment of the 
appellant as Higher Secondary School Teacher (Economics) on the 
ground that he did not possess the requisite State Eligibility Test 
qualification in the concerned subject.
3.	
As the issue in both these appeals is the same and as the Division 
Bench of High Court has passed a common judgment and order, both 
these appeals are being disposed of together by the present order.
FACTUAL MATRIX
4.	
The brief facts of the case are as under:
4.1.	
The appellant had entered the service as an Upper Primary 
School Teacher on 01.11.2002 and was promoted as High 
School Teacher on 15.07.2004. Thereafter, on 15.07.2021, 
he was appointed as a Higher Secondary School Teacher 
(hereinafter referred as “HSST”) (Economics) by the competent 
authority. At the time of his appointment as HSST, the appellant 
was having a Bachelor’s degree in Economics, a Master’s 
degree in Economics and a B.Ed. in Social Sciences and State 
Eligibility Test (hereinafter referred as “SET”) qualification in 
Malayalam.
4.2.	
On the other hand, respondent no. 4, entered the service as 
an Upper Primary School Assistant on 01.11.1997 and was 
promoted as High School Assistant (English) from 16.07.2005 
onwards. She was having a degree in B.A. (Economics), M.A. 
(Economics) and B. Ed. (Social Sciences) and SET qualification 
in Economics. 
4.3.	
Aggrieved by the appointment of the appellant, respondent 
no. 4 raised objections alleging that the appellant neither had 
mandatory SET qualification in Economics as prescribed under 
Rule 6.2(24) of Chapter XXXII of the Kerala Education Rules 
(hereinafter referred as “the Rules”) nor he had ten years of 
high school teaching experience to fall within the exemption 
of mandatory SET under under Rule 10(4) of Chapter XXXII 
of the Rules.
4.4.	
Acting upon the objections, respondent-authorities vide its order 
dated 18.06.2022 declined to approve the appointment of the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
129
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
appellant on the ground that the appellant neither had SET 
qualification in Economics nor he had ten years of experience 
as a High School Teacher to avail the exemption of mandatory 
SET qualification in the concerned subject. Reliance was placed 
on the Government Order dated 18.01.2021 which clarified 
that it is mandatory to pass the SET exam in the concerned 
subject to become a Higher Secondary school teacher.
4.5.	
Being aggrieved by the decision of the respondent-authorities, 
the appellant preferred a Writ Petition (C.) No. 20130/2022 
seeking quashing of order dated 18.06.2022 and direction to 
respondent-authorities to approve his appointment as HSST 
with effect from 15.07.2021.
4.6.	
On the other hand, respondent no. 4 also preferred a Writ 
Petition (C.) No. 11190/2023 seeking direction to respondent-
authorities to consider her claim for appointment as HSST 
(Economics).
4.7.	
Learned Single Judge vide common judgment and order 
dated 14.05.2024 dismissed the petition preferred by the 
appellant and allowed the petition preferred by the respondent 
no. 4. Accordingly, it was declared that the appellant is not 
qualified for appointment to the post of HSST (Economics) 
in a vacancy that arose on 01.06.2021 in the concerned 
school. Further, the learned Single Judge gave direction to the 
respondent-authorities to consider the claim of respondent no. 
4 for appointment as HSST (Economics) in the school w.e.f. 
01.06.2021 with all consequential benefits, if respondent no. 
4 is found entitled.
4.8.	
Appellant, being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order 
passed by the learned Single Judge, preferred Writ Appeal 
No(s). 733 of 2024 and 769 of 2024.
4.9.	
Vide the impugned judgment, the Division Bench of the High 
Court dismissed both the appeals filed by the appellant and 
thereby confirmed the judgment and order rendered by the 
learned Single Judge.
4.10.	 Aggrieved by the impugned judgment, the appellant has 
preferred the present appeals.

130
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
5.	
Mr. Nikhil Goel, learned Senior Counsel and Mr. Haris Beeran, 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, challenged the 
impugned judgment, which upheld the rejection of the appointment 
of the appellant as HSST (Economics) on the ground that he did 
not possess a SET qualification in Economics and made multifold 
submissions as under:
5.1.	 It is submitted that the appellant is qualified for the post of 
HSST (Economics) under the Rules. The appellant holds the 
Bachelor’s Degree in Economics, Master’s Degree in Economics 
and B.Ed. in Social Sciences. Further, the appellant is having 
SET qualification in Malayalam.
5.2.	 Learned Counsel referred to Rule 6.2(24) of Chapter XXXII of 
the Rules which expressly requires the postgraduate degree 
and B.Ed. to be in the concerned subject. However, so far as 
SET is concerned, it is provided that the concerned candidate 
must have passed SET for the post of HSST conducted by the 
Government of Kerala or by an agency authorized by the State 
Government. Thus, it is submitted that the said rule does not 
specify any subject requirement for the SET qualification and 
the deliberate omission of subject-specific language in the SET 
qualification demonstrates the intent of the legislature that the 
SET qualification need not be subject-specific.
5.3.	 Learned Counsel, therefore, contended that the High Court in 
the impugned judgment erroneously interpreted Rule 6.2(24)
(iii) of Chapter XXXII of the Rules and erred in reading into 
the Rule a condition which the Rule itself does not contain, 
thereby impermissibly adding words to a statutory provision and 
such an approach is contrary to settled principles of statutory 
interpretation. It is further submitted that the High Court wrongly 
relied on Government orders and circulars prescribing subject-
specific SET, as executive instructions cannot amend, override 
or supplement statutory rules.
5.4.	 It is also contended that the interpretation adopted by the High 
Court contradicts the long understanding and the application 
of Rule 6.2(24) of the Rules across educational institutions in 
Kerala.

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
131
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
5.5.	 Learned Counsel further submitted that Rule 10(4) of Chapter 
XXXII of the Rules provides exemption from SET for certain 
candidates based on other qualifications like NET, Ph.D., M.Phil., 
without requiring these qualifications in any specific subject. 
This reinforces that SET is intended as a general eligibility 
benchmark, not a subject-exclusive qualification. In addition, 
teachers with ten years of approved teaching certificates are 
also exempted from SET, regardless of the subject of their 
experience. It is submitted that the appellant was appointed as 
Upper Primary School Assistant on 01.11.2002 and promoted 
as High School Assistant (English) on 15.07.2004, whereas, 
the respondent no. 4 was promoted as High School Assistant 
(English) from 16.07.2005.
5.6.	 Learned Counsel for the appellant, therefore, urged that though 
the appellant was qualified to be appointed as HSST, his 
appointment was not approved by the authority and, therefore, 
the appellant had preferred the captioned writ petition. Learned 
Counsel submitted that the learned Single Judge as well as the 
Division Bench of the High court have committed serious error 
by interpreting provisions contained in Rule 6.2(24) of Chapter 
XXXII of the Rules.
5.7.	 Learned Counsel, therefore, urged that the impugned judgment 
passed by the High Court is liable to be set aside, and appropriate 
direction be issued to the respondent-authorities to appoint the 
appellant on the post in question by granting necessary approval.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 1 (State of 
Kerala)
6.	
Mr. Dileep Poolakkot, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
State, submitted that the impugned judgment is legal, valid and based 
on correct appreciation of facts and law, warranting no interference 
under Article 136 of the Constitution. Following submissions were 
made on behalf of respondent no. 1:
6.1.	 It is submitted that the appellant was appointed by transfer as 
HSST (Economics) on 15.07.2021. Accordingly, the Manager of 
the respondent-school submitted a proposal for the approval of 
the appointment of the appellant before the competent authority. 
Thereafter, the respondent no. 4 submitted a complaint in the 

132
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
office of Regional Deputy Director regarding the appointment 
and qualification of the appellant. It was pointed out by the 
respondent no. 4 that the appellant was not qualified for the 
post of HSST (Economics), as the appellant does not have 
SET in the relevant subject or ten years of high school teaching 
experience.
6.2.	 It is submitted that the appellant admittedly possesses BA and 
MA in Economics, B.Ed. in Social Studies and SET qualification 
in Malayalam, not in Economics and Rule 6(2)(24)(iii) of Chapter 
XXXII of the Rules requires SET in the concerned subject, 
namely Economics, for appointment as HSST (Economics). The 
appellant further does not possess ten years of approved High 
School teaching service, having only 9 years, 10 months and 
14 days of such service after excluding periods of deputation 
and leave without allowance, and therefore, was not entitled for 
the exemption under Rule 10(4) of Chapter XXXII of the Rules.
6.3.	 The State submitted that the Government Order dated 
18.06.2022 (G.O.(Rt) No. 3672/2022/G.Edn) rejecting approval 
of the appointment of the appellant was passed strictly in 
accordance with the Rules and pursuant to directions issued 
by the High Court. The subsequent grant of lower scale salary 
to the appellant was only an interim arrangement in compliance 
with court directions and does not confer any right of approval 
or regular appointment.
6.4.	 It is therefore submitted that the appellant lacks the essential 
statutory qualifications, the High Court has correctly interpreted 
Rules 6 and 10 of Chapter XXXII of the Rules.
6.5.	 Learned counsel therefore urged that the High Court has not 
committed any error while passing the impugned judgment and 
order. Thus, it is submitted that the present appeals are liable 
to be dismissed. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 3 (Manager, 
PTM Higher Secondary School)
7.	
Mr. Zulfiker Ali P.S., learned counsel appearing for respondent no. 
3, submitted that under the Kerala Education Act and the Rules, 
the Manager is the statutorily recognised appointing authority and 
has exclusive control over staff management. The Manager has the 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
133
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
inherent right to appoint teachers by transfer from the feeder category 
of High School Assistants (HSA) on a seniority-cum-suitability basis. 
Following submissions were made on behalf of respondent no. 3:
7.1.	 It is submitted that upon the vacancy of HSST (Economics) on 
01.06.2021, the Manager validly appointed the appellant, who 
was the senior-most qualified teacher in the school, strictly in 
accordance with the Rules.
7.2.	 Learned Counsel submitted that a literal and harmonious 
reading of Rule 6 of Chapter XXXII of the Rules would reveal a 
deliberate distinction regarding qualifications. While the Master’s 
and B.Ed. degrees must be in the concerned subject, the rule 
merely mandates a pass in the SET without any subject-specific 
restriction. It is further submitted that the omission of subject-
specific language for SET is intentional and indicates that the 
rule-making authority did not intend SET to be confined to the 
subject of appointment.
7.3.	 It is submitted that the appellant holds a Post Graduation 
in Economics and a B.Ed. in Social Science and an SET 
in Malayalam, satisfies the statutory eligibility for HSST 
(Economics) because the SET is intended as an assessment 
of general teaching aptitude rather than a repetitive assessment 
of subject expertise, which is already verified by the post-
graduate degree. 
7.4.	 Learned Counsel further submitted that respondent no. 4 
possessing SET in Economics would not supersede the 
appellant’s seniority and valid qualifications as per the statutory 
rules.
7.5.	 Reliance is placed on Geetha v. State of Kerala, (2012 (1) 
KLT 829), wherein it was held that general teaching service is 
the criteria for exemption under Rule 10(4) of the Rules and 
that the Rules should not be re-written to insert subject-specific 
restrictions where none exist. It is asserted that across Kerala, 
numerous HSSTs appointed with SET in subjects different from 
their teaching subject are presently in service, reflecting a 
consistent administrative interpretation of Rule 6. It is submitted 
that disturbing this settled understanding would jeopardise 
the careers of countless teachers and unsettle long-standing 
appointments.

134
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
7.6.	 Reliance is placed on the Full Bench judgment of the High Court 
of Kerala in Manager, MPVHS School v. Girija, (2003) 1 KLT 
935, to contend that executive orders or circulars, including 
the Government letter dated 18.01.2021, cannot override or 
supplement the statutory provisions of the Rules.
7.7.	 It is therefore submitted that the respondent no. 3 acted strictly 
within the four corners of the Rules in appointing the appellant 
and the impugned judgment, by importing a subject-specific 
requirement for SET, rewrites the statutory rule and is legally 
unsustainable.
7.8.	 It is therefore urged that the impugned judgement and order is 
liable to be set-aside and it is prayed that the appointment of 
the appellant made by the Management to be upheld.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENT NO. 4 (Competing 
candidate for HSST (Economics))
8.	
Ms. Anne Mathew, learned counsel appearing for respondent no. 4, 
supported the interpretation adopted by the High Court that Rule 6(2)
(24)(iii) of Chapter XXXII of the Rules mandates passing of SET in 
the concerned subject for appointment as HSST and made multifold 
submissions as under:
8.1.	 Learned Counsel submitted that to ensure maintenance 
of academic standards at the Higher Secondary level, the 
legislature decided to conduct SET examination for the post 
of HSST for the concerned subject as mandated in Rule 6 of 
Chapter XXXII of the Rules. Thus, the interpretation placed by 
the High Court is purposive, contextual and consistent with the 
scheme of the Rules and does not amount to adding words to 
the statute. Reliance is placed on Union of India v. Pushpa 
Rani, (2008) 9 SCC 242, to argue that insisting on SET in 
the concerned subject is a policy choice aimed at maintaining 
academic standards and the courts should not dilute or re-
interpret qualification requirements contrary to the understanding 
of the rule-making authority.
8.2.	 It is contended that the Government Letter dated 18.01.2021 
clarifying the requirement of SET in the concerned subject 
is legal, valid and within the competence of the rule-making 
authority. Reliance is placed on Kunjunjamma v. State of 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
135
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
Kerala, (2015) 11 SCC 440, to support the validity of Government 
action and clarifications relating to SET qualification requirements 
and to contend that the Government’s interpretation of Rule 6 
of Chapter XXXII of the Rules is within its competence and 
cannot be lightly interfered with. It is further submitted that the 
appellant never challenged the validity of the said Government 
Letter before the High Court and therefore cannot dispute its 
applicability in the present proceedings.
8.3.	 It is further submitted that the appellant possesses SET only in 
Malayalam, not in Economics and further, the appellant does not 
have ten years of approved High School teaching service, having 
only 9 years, 10 months and 14 days of eligible service after 
excluding periods of deputation and leave without allowance. 
Consequently, the appellant is ineligible both under Rule 6(2)
(24)(iii) (absence of SET in Economics) and under Rule 10(4) 
of Chapter XXXII (failure to satisfy service-based exemption) 
of the Rules.
8.4.	 It is submitted that respondent no. 4 is fully qualified under the 
statutory rules, possessing BA and MA in Economics, B.Ed. in 
Social Science and SET qualification in Economics. Respondent 
no. 4 attended the interview, produced all requisite documents 
and was wrongfully overlooked when the Manager appointed 
the appellant, despite her superior statutory eligibility.
8.5.	 Learned Counsel referred to the prospectus issued for conducting 
the SET examination in July 2021, a copy of which is placed 
on record at Page 162 of the Counter Affidavit filed on behalf of 
respondent no. 4. Clause 2 of the said prospectus provides for 
the scheme of the test which includes two papers and further 
provides that Paper II shall be a test based on the subject of 
specialisation of the candidate at the Post Graduate (PG Level).
8.6.	 The Full Bench decision of the Kerala High Court in Girija 
(supra), is distinguished by learned counsel, arguing that 
the said decision dealt with Chapter XXXI of the Rules (High 
School Assistants), not Chapter XXXII of the Rules (Higher 
Secondary Teachers) and the interpretative issue in the said 
decision concerned B.Ed. subject requirement, whereas, the 
present case concerns SET for HSST, a distinct cadre with 
higher academic standards.

136
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
8.7.	 It is submitted that accepting the interpretation of the appellant 
would undermine academic standards in Higher Secondary 
education, permit appointment of teachers lacking subject-
specific eligibility, unsettle settled appointments and encourage 
avoidable litigation.
8.8.	 Learned Counsel, therefore, urged that the High Court has 
correctly interpreted the Rules, the appellant is statutorily 
ineligible and the directions to consider respondent no. 4 for 
appointment are lawful and just under Rule 6.2(24) of Chapter 
XXXII of the Rules. The present appeals are therefore liable to 
be dismissed and the impugned judgment deserves to be upheld.
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
9.	
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at length and having 
carefully perused the material on record, the Rules as well as the 
prospectus of the SET examination, it would emerge that the appellant 
had entered the service as an Upper Primary School Teacher on 
01.11.2002 and was promoted as High School Teacher on 15.07.2004 
and, thereafter, on 15.07.2021, the appellant was appointed as HSST 
(Economics) by the competent authority. It would further reveal that 
respondent no. 4 entered the service as an Upper Primary School 
Assistant on 01.11.1997 and was promoted as High School Assistant 
(English) from 16.07.2005 onwards.
10.	 Now, it is not in dispute that the appellant possesses the Bachelor’s 
Degree in Economics, Master’s Degree in Economics, B.Ed. in Social 
Sciences and passed SET in Malayalam. It is also not in dispute 
that respondent no. 4 possesses a degree in B.A. (Economics), 
M.A. (Economics), B.Ed. (Social Sciences) and passed the SET 
examination in Economics.
11.	 Keeping in view the aforesaid factual aspects, the question which is 
posed for our consideration is whether Rule 6(2)(24)(iii) of Chapter 
XXXII of the Rules mandates that the SET qualification must be 
in the concerned subject only for appointment as HSST or in any 
subject would suffice for eligibility, and if so, whether the appellant 
satisfies the said requirement or qualifies for exemption under Rule 
10(4) of Chapter XXXII of the Rules.
12.	 The facts being undisputed, the controversy turns entirely on the 
correct interpretation of the statutory rules governing eligibility. 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
137
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
Chapter XXXII of the Rules governs appointment to the cadre of 
Higher Secondary School Teachers, a cadre distinct from High 
School Assistants and governed by a separate statutory framework.
13.	 The answer of the question posed before us will depend on the 
interpretation of Rule 6 of Chapter XXXII of the Rules which prescribes 
the essential qualifications for appointment as HSST. The said Rule 
is reproduced as under:
“6. Qualifications:- No person shall be eligible for 
appointment to the category in column (2) in the table 
below under the method specified in column (3) unless 
he possesses the qualifications prescribed in the 
corresponding entry in column (4) there of. 
Sl. No.
Category
Method of 
Appointment
Qualifications
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(21)
xxxxxxx
By Transfer 
and by direct 
recruitment
(i) Master’s Degree in the 
concerned subject will not less 
than 50% marks from any 
of the Universities in Kerala 
or a qualification recognised 
as equivalent thereto in 
the respective subject by a 
University in Kerala.
(ii) (1) B.Ed. in the concerned 
subject acquired after a regular 
course of study from any of 
the Universities in Kerala or 
a qualification recognised 
as equivalent thereto by a 
University in Kerala.
(2) In the absence of persons 
with B.Ed. Degree in the 
concerned subject, B.Ed. 
Degree acquired in anyone of 
the subject under the concerned 
Faculty as specified in the 
Acts/Statutes of any of the 
Universities in Kerala.
(22)
xxxxxxx
(23)
xxxxxxx
(24)
Economics
(25)
xxxxxxx
(26)
xxxxxxx
(27)
xxxxxxx

138
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(3) In the absence of persons 
with B.Ed. degree as specified 
in terms (1) and (2) above, 
persons with B.Ed. Degree in 
any subject acquired after a 
regular course of study from 
any of the Universities in Kerala 
or a qualification recognised as 
equivalent thereto by any of the 
Universities in Kerala.
(iii) Pass in the State Eligibility 
Test for the post of Higher 
Secondary School Teacher 
conducted by Government 
of Kerala or by the Agency 
authorized by the State 
Government.
(emphasis supplied)
14.	 Thus, from the perusal of Rule 6, it transpires that the said Rule 
provides for qualification for appointment as HSST. Clause 24 deals 
with the subject ‘Economics’. The Rule provides that the post in 
question requires a Master’s Degree in the concerned subject with a 
particular percentage of marks and a B.Ed. qualification. Sub-clause 
(iii) provides that the candidate shall “pass in the State Eligibility 
Test (SET) for the post of Higher Secondary School Teacher (HSST) 
conducted by the Government of Kerala or by the agency authorized 
by the State Government.”
15.	 The argument advanced on behalf of the appellant and respondent 
no. 3 rests on the absence of the words “in the concerned subject” 
in clause (iii). However, we are of the view that a statutory provision 
cannot be interpreted in isolation or by placing undue emphasis on 
textual omission divorced from context, purpose and scheme.
16.	 In Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and 
Investment Co. Ltd., (1987) 1 SCC 424, this Court authoritatively 
held that interpretation must depend on the text and the context 
and that the statute must be read as a whole so as to advance its 
object and suppress the mischief. It was observed that a construction 
which leads to absurdity or defeats the purpose of the enactment 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
139
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
must be avoided. The relevant paragraph of the said decision is 
reproduced as under:
“33. Interpretation must depend on the text and the context. 
They are the bases of interpretation. One may well say if the 
text is the texture, context is what gives the colour. Neither 
can be ignored. Both are important. That interpretation 
is best which makes the textual interpretation match the 
contextual. A statute is best interpreted when we know why 
it was enacted. With this knowledge, the statute must be 
read, first as a whole and then section by section, clause by 
clause, phrase by phrase and word by word. If a statute is 
looked at, in the context of its enactment, with the glasses 
of the statute-maker, provided by such context, its scheme, 
the sections, clauses, phrases and words may take colour 
and appear different than when the statute is looked at 
without the glasses provided by the context. With these 
glasses we must look at the Act as a whole and discover 
what each section, each clause, each phrase and each 
word is meant and designed to say as to fit into the scheme 
of the entire Act. No part of a statute and no word of a 
statute can be construed in isolation. Statutes have to be 
construed so that every word has a place and everything 
is in its place. It is by looking at the definition as a whole 
in the setting of the entire Act and by reference to what 
preceded the enactment and the reasonsfor it that the Court 
construed the expression “Prize Chit” in Srinivasa [(1980) 
4 SCC 507 : (1981) 1 SCR 801 : 51 Com Cas 464] and 
we find no reason to depart from the Court’s construction.”
17.	 The Government Letter dated 18.01.2021 further clarifies that SET 
must be in the concerned subject to become a Higher Secondary 
teacher. The relevant part of the said Letter is reproduced as under:
“Your attention is drawn to the notification. Since it is 
mandatory to pass the SET exam in the respective subject 
to become a Higher Secondary teacher, it is informed that 
the SET qualification in Sociology cannot be considered 
for appointment to the HSST (English) post.”
18.	 At this stage, we would also like to refer to the prospectus for the 
SET examination. The relevant paragraphs and the scheme of the 
test is extracted as below:

140
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“1.	
Introduction
In order to ensure the standards of teaching in Higher 
Secondary Course, the Government have decided to 
conduct the State Eligibility Test for the candidates to 
be selected as Higher Secondary School Teachers 
and Non-Vocational Teachers in VHSE. A pass in 
the State Eligibility Test (SET) is stipulated as a 
mandatory requirement for appointment as Higher 
Secondary School Teachers in the State as per the 
Special Rules in force.
XXX
XXX
XXX
2.	
Scheme of the Test.
2.1	 There shall be two papers for the SET-JULY-2021.
Paper I
Paper I is common for all candidates. It consists of 
two parts,  Part(A) General Knowledge and Part(B) 
Aptitude in Teaching.
Paper II
Paper II shall be a test based on the subject of 
specialisation of the candidate at the Post Graduate 
(PG) Level.”
19.	 On perusal of the aforesaid scheme of the test, it transpires that the 
test consists of two papers where Paper II is based on the subject 
of specialisation of the candidate at Post Graduate Level. Thus, it 
is not in dispute that SET is conducted subject-wise and it includes 
a paper testing postgraduate-level subject expertise, therefore, a 
candidate cannot qualify in SET without choosing a specific subject 
of specialisation. Hence, when SET qualification is itself subject-
specific, it is immaterial whether or not Rule 6.2(24)(iii) of Chapter 
XXXII of the Rules provides for SET “in the concerned subject” or not.
20.	 The specific case of respondent no. 1 and respondent no. 4 that 
the legislature decided to conduct SET examination for the post of 
HSST in order to ensure the academic and teaching standards in 
the Higher Secondary level and thus, the SET qualification must be 
in the same subject as that of the HSST post, is well founded, as 

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
141
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
the said submission is supported by the object and scheme of the 
test laid down in the prospectus as well.
21.	 It is clear that the object of introducing SET for Higher Secondary 
Teachers is to ensure subject competence and pedagogical suitability 
at the Higher Secondary level, which is qualitatively distinct from lower 
teaching cadres. Thus, in this backdrop, to accept the interpretation 
of the appellant would result in a situation where a candidate tested 
for eligibility in an entirely unrelated discipline could claim appointment 
to teach another specialised subject and such an interpretation would 
defeat the very object of prescribing the SET qualification at the 
Higher Secondary level and would lead to manifestly absurd results.
22.	 Therefore, a purposive and contextual reading of Rule 6 of Chapter 
XXXII of the Rules compels the conclusion that the SET qualification 
must necessarily correspond to the subject of appointment, even if the 
Rule does not expressly reiterate the phrase “concerned subject” in 
clause (iii) of the said Rule. We are unable to accept the submission 
that such an interpretation amounts to “adding words” to the Rule, as 
this Court is duty bound to undertake a purposive and harmonious 
interpretation of the statute.
23.	 The reliance placed by the appellant and respondent no. 3 on Girija 
(supra) is misplaced and the High Court rightly distinguished the 
said decision, as it concerned the cadre of High School Assistants 
and the B.Ed. qualification and the issue in the present case involves 
Higher Secondary cadre and the SET qualification, which stands 
on a distinct footing with higher academic standards. The relevant 
paragraph of the impugned judgment is reproduced as under:
“7. Before going into the said issue, it will be better to bear 
in mind the well settled principles of interpretation. If the rule 
is clear and unambiguous, the intention of the legislature 
need not be gather with reference to the other rules We 
must remember that Chapter XXXI Rule 2 of KER deals 
with appointment of the High School Assistants, whereas 
Chapter XXXII is concerning the Higher Secondary 
School Teachers. The judgment of the Full Bench in Girija 
(Supra) was concerned with the interpretation of Rule 2 
of Chapter XXXI of KER. On a reading of the said Rule, 
it becomes evident that there is no insistence to obtain 
B.Ed in the concerned subject for appointment as HSA. 
However coming to Rule 6.2(24) of Chapter XXXII K.E.R, 

142
[2026] 3 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
that is not the case. Therefore, we are of the view that 
interpretation placed by the Full Bench of this Court in 
Girija (Supra) cannot come to the aid of the appellant 
in this case. Therefore, we find that the learned Single 
Judge was perfectly justified in finding that the Rule 6 of 
Chapter XXXII KER is differently worded from Rule 2 of 
Chapter XXXI KER. It is also pertinent to note that, the 
post to which these two Rules apply are also different.”
24.	 Further reliance placed by respondent no. 3 on the decision of a 
learned Single Judge of the High Court of Kerala in the case of Geetha 
(supra) is distinguishable, as it concerned Rule 10 of Chapter XXXII 
of the Rules which provides for exemption for the SET qualification 
in case of ten years teaching experience. However, the present case 
is concerned about the very foundation of the SET qualification and 
thus, the same cannot be treated lightly.
25.	 From the aforesaid detailed discussion, it can be said that the 
concerned candidate is required to pass SET in the concerned subject. 
In the present case, it is not in dispute that the appellant, though 
having Bachelor’s Degree as well as Master’s Degree in Economics, 
passed SET in Malayalam, whereas, respondent no. 4 is having the 
degrees of Bachelor’s and Master’s in Economics as well as the SET 
qualification in Economics. We are, therefore, of the view that when 
respondent no. 4 is fulfilling all the required eligibility criteria including 
the SET qualification in the concerned subject, the High Court has not 
committed any error while passing the impugned judgment and order. 
26.	 At this stage, it is also relevant to observe that it is the case of the 
appellant that Rule 10(4) of Chapter XXXII of the Rules provides 
that “teachers who have completed ten years of approved teaching 
service at the High School level shall be exempted from passing 
the State Eligibility Test”. Admittedly, the appellant has completed 
09 years 10 months and 14 days service, i.e., less than ten years 
which is the minimum prescribed by the Rules and, therefore, the 
appellant is not entitled to seek an exemption under the said Rule. 
Thus, we are of the view that the said contention of the appellant 
is also misconceived.
CONCLUSION
27.	 Therefore, from the above detailed analysis, the answer to the 
question posed for our determination is as under:

[2026] 3 S.C.R. 
143
Zubair. P v. State of Kerala & Ors.
27.1.	 When Rule 6.2(24)(iii) of Chapter XXXII of the Rules is read 
with the prospectus of the SET examination, particularly 
Clause 2 of the prospectus, it can be safely said that the 
candidate is required to pass SET in the concerned subject 
to qualify for the appointment to the post of HSST in the 
said concerned subject. Even though in Rule 6.2(24)(iii), the 
words “in the concerned subject” are missing, the said Rule 
cannot be interpreted in isolation and the textual omission 
has to be inferred from context, purpose and scheme of the 
provision. Thus, the said clause is required to be interpreted 
in the aforesaid manner. and possession of SET qualification 
in any other subject unrelated to the teaching post, does not 
suffice the statutory eligibility criteria.
27.2.	 Therefore, the High Court has not committed any error in 
affirming the decision of the learned Single Judge, wherein it 
was declared that the appellant is not qualified for appointment 
to the post of HSST (Economics) in a vacancy that arose 
on 01.06.2021 in the concerned school and respondent no. 
4 is eligible for appointment as HSST (Economics) in the 
school w.e.f. 01.06.2021, with all consequential benefits, if 
respondent no. 4 is found entitled and the findings in the 
present judgment regarding the eligibility of respondent no. 
4 shall also be considered while considering her claim for 
appointment to the post.
27.3.	 Necessary orders shall be issued by the respondent-authorities 
within a period of two months from the date of this judgment. 
28.	 It is further clarified that in pursuance to the appointment made 
to the post in question, no recovery of excess amount paid to the 
appellant, if any, shall be carried out by the respondent-authorities.
29.	 For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the present 
appeals deserve to be dismissed and accordingly, both the present 
appeals are dismissed. 
Result of the case: Appeals dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
