[2026] 4 S.C.R. 600 : 2026 INSC 330
The West Bengal State Electricity 
Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors.
v.
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 10262 of 2025)
07 April 2026
[Sanjay Karol and 
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Matter pertains to the manner of filling of a vacancy reserved for 
Person with Disability with Low Vision (PWD-LV) in the Unreserved 
category UR (PWD-LV), where the recruitment notification stipulated 
that in case of non-availability of qualified unreserved candidate 
in the PWD-LV category, the vacancy will be filled up by PWD 
candidates of other categories as per merit.
Headnotes†
Service law – Reservation – Filling up of unreserved vacancies 
by reserved candidates – Mobility of a PWD-LV candidate 
from reserved category of OBC-A to Unreserved horizontal 
category of UR (PWD-LV) – Recruitment Notification for 30 
vacancies for the post of Junior Engineer, wherein one post 
meant for unreserved UR (PWD-LV) and five posts for Other 
Backward Classes-A (OBC-A) – Respondent No.1 PWD-LV 
candidate applied under the Unreserved category for the 
said post under UR (PWD-LV) quota, and respondent No. 3 
(OBC-A candidate) applied under the OBC-A quota, and also 
stated that he belongs to the PWD (LV) category – In the 
recruitment process, the respondent No.1 scored 55.667 marks, 
whereas, the respondent No.3 scored 66.667 marks – Since 
the respondent No.3 under OBC-A category also belongs 
to PWD-LV category and obtained higher marks than the 
respondent No.1, he was offered appointment to the said 
Unreserved post of UR(PWD-LV) – Challenge to, by respondent 
No.1, in view of the recruitment notification stipulating that in 
case of non-availability of qualified UR (PWD-LV) candidate, 
the vacancy will be filled up by PWD candidates of the other 
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
601
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
categories as per merit – High Court dismissed the petition 
holding that the respondent No.3 also belonged to the PWD-
LV category and had scored more marks than the respondent 
No.1 – However, the Division Bench held that when a qualified 
unreserved PWD-LV candidate is available, the vacancy is to 
be filled up by that candidate only, even though there may be 
more meritorious PWDLV candidates available in the reserved 
category of OBCA – Correctness:
Held: Post earmarked for special (horizontal) reservation under the 
Unreserved category will be open to every candidate possessing 
the attribute or character of the special (horizontal) reservation – 
Thus, if the Unreserved/Open post is meant for the special category 
of Persons with Disabilities, it means that the said post will be 
open to all candidates of all vertical social categories, whether 
SC, ST or OBC, provided such candidates are also Persons with 
Disabilities – Principle of migration in reservation will be applicable 
in this scenario also – Even though there are candidates under 
the Unreserved category who are Persons with Disabilities, if 
there are more meritorious candidates belonging to any of the 
social categories like SC, ST or OBC who are also Persons with 
Disabilities, such more meritorious persons from the SC, ST or 
OBC category can be appointed against the Unreserved quota 
meant for Person with Disabilities by virtue of merit – Horizontally 
reserved post of PWD-LV falling under the Unreserved category 
can be filled by any PWD-LV candidate belonging to any social 
reserved category, as this post of PWD-LV under the Unreserved 
category is also open to all PWD-LV candidates belonging to any 
social reserved category – Any candidate belonging to any social 
category can compete for this post so long as they belong to the 
PWD-LV category – Principle of mobility will also apply when filling 
the said post of UR (PWD-LV) – Only condition attached to this 
Unreserved/Open category is that it is meant only for candidates 
belonging to the horizontal PWD-LV category, i.e., it is specially 
reserved for persons who are categorised as PWD-LV – Unreserved 
post/vacancy for PWD-LV is available and open to all, irrespective of 
the social category they may belong to, provided they also belong to 
the same special category of PWD-LV – As the said post falls under 
the Unreserved category, it is to be filled up purely on merit – Merit 
is the co-attendant and inseparable attribute of appointment to any 
post under the “Unreserved” category – As a consequence, every 

602
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
person belonging to any social reserved category, can compete 
with others, including those under the “Unreserved” category and 
can be appointed against such Unreserved post, so long as they 
belong to the special PWD-LV category, as it is the condition that the 
post under the Unreserved category is reserved for the horizontal 
category of PWDLV – Recruitment notification cannot be read to 
insist that so long as any PWD-LV candidate under the Unreserved 
category is available, there will be an absolute bar to consider any 
other meritorious PWD-LV candidate belonging to any of the social 
reserved categories and only such Unreserved category PWD-LV 
candidate can be appointed irrespective of the merit – Such an 
interpretation, as adopted by the Division Bench, flies in the face 
of the well-settled principle of law for filling up Unreserved posts 
and law of migration – Less meritorious PWD-LV candidate under 
the Unreserved category has to give way to the claim of a more 
meritorious PWD-LV candidate from any other reserved social 
categories for the said post of UR (PWD-LV), as was correctly 
held by the Single Bench – Any contrary view would be patently 
arbitrary being opposed to the equality clause under Articles 14 
and 16 – Condition in the recruitment notification would mean that 
even though qualified PWD-LV candidates under the Unreserved 
category may be available, if there is a PWD-LV candidate belonging 
to other social reserved category available who is better in merit 
than the Unreserved PWD-LV candidate available, the said post is 
to be filled up by the more meritorious reserved PWD-LV candidate 
by ignoring the claim of the less meritorious Unreserved candidate 
by virtue of merit – Qua a vacancy/post under “Unreserved” 
category for the PWD-LV candidates, all PWD-LV candidates 
are equal and have similar rights even if they belong to different 
social reserved categories, and the most meritorious amongst 
them has to be preferred – Thus, the Respondent No.  3 was 
adjusted against the PWD-LV vacancy in the Unreserved category 
by virtue of his merit, as he was more meritorious than anyone 
else including the respondent No. 1 in the Unreserved category 
– Furthermore, respondent No. 3, though, was more meritorious 
than the respondent No. 1 had not availed any relaxation qua the 
essential qualifications for the said post of UR (PWD-LV) – Division 
Bench misunderstood the implication of the said condition in the 
recruitment notification – Thus, the impugned judgment and order 
passed by the Division Bench set aside, restoring the decision of 
the Single Bench. [Paras 27, 28, 30, 31, 38-50]

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
603
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
Reservation – Law relating to reservation – Filling up of 
unreserved vacancies by reserved candidates – Reservations 
classified into two categories-vertical and horizontal  – 
Interrelationship between two kinds of reservations – 
Explained. [Paras 20-22]
Case Law Cited
Anil Kumar Gupta v. State of U.P. [1995] Supp. 2 SCR 396 : 
(1995) 5 SCC 173; Saurav Yadav v. State of UP [2020] 11 SCR 
281 : (2021) 4 SCC 542; Indra Sawhney v. Union of India [1992] 
Supp. 2 SCR 454 : (1992) Supp. 3 SCC 217; Neil Aurelio Nunes 
(OBC reservation) v. Union of India [2022] 11 SCR 585 : (2022) 
4 SCC 1; Deepa E.V.  v. Union of India [2017] 1 SCR 938 : 
(2017) 12 SCC 680; Union of India v. Sajib Roy [2025] 9 SCR 
542 – relied on.
List of Acts
Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Filling of a vacancy reserved for Person with Disability with Low 
Vision (PWD-LV) in the Unreserved category UR (PWD-LV); 
Recruitment notification; Non-availability of qualified unreserved 
candidate in the PWD-LV category; Vacancy to be filled up by 
PWD candidates of other categories as per merit; Reservation; 
Unreserved vacancies; Reserved candidates; Mobility of a 
PWD-LV candidate from reserved category of OBC-A to Unreserved 
horizontal category of UR(PWD-LV); Post of Junior Engineer; 
Unreserved UR (PWD-LV); Other Backward Classes-A (OBC-A); 
Person with Disability with Low Vision-PWD-LV candidate; 
Unreserved category; Post under UR (PWD-LV) quota; Post 
under the OBC-A quota; Recruitment process; Unreserved post 
of UR (PWD-LV); Non-availability of qualified UR (PWD-LV) 
candidate.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 10262 of 2025
From the Judgment and Order dated 07.05.2024 of the High Court 
at Calcutta in MAT No. 69 of 2024

604
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Dr. Balbir Singh, Amicus Curiae.
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Kunal Chatterji, Ms. Shraddha Chirania, Ms. Maitrayee Banerjee, 
Rohit Bansal, Varij Nayan Mishra.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Samarendra Nath Biswas, Anindo Mukherjee, Rameshwar Prasad 
Goyal, Ms. Shraddha Chirania, Kunal Mimani, Abhijeet Pandey, 
Soumya Dutta.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Nongmeikapam Kotiswar Singh, J.
1.	
The present appeal has been preferred against the judgment and 
order dated 07.05.2024 passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court at Calcutta in MAT 69/2024 with CAN 1 of 2024, whereby the 
order passed by the Single Bench in WPA 26312/2023 was set aside. 
2.	
The core issue involved in this appeal relates to the manner of filling 
of a vacancy reserved for Person with Disability with Low Vision 
(PWD-LV) in the Unreserved category UR (PWD-LV)1, where the 
recruitment notification stipulated that in case of non-availability 
of qualified unreserved candidate in the PWD-LV category, the 
vacancy will be filled up by PWD candidates of other categories 
as per merit. 
3.	
By the impugned order, the Division Bench of the Calcutta High 
Court held that when a qualified unreserved PWD-LV candidate is 
available, the vacancy is to be filled up by the qualified unreserved 
candidate only, even though there may be more meritorious PWD-LV 
candidates available in the reserved category of OBC-A, as per of 
the aforesaid stipulation in the recruitment notification. 
4.	
In order to appreciate this issue involved, a brief reference to the 
relevant facts would be apposite. 
1	
UR (PWD-LV): Unreserved (Persons with Disabilities – Low Vision or Blindness)

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
605
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
5.	
A recruitment process was initiated by the Appellant, West Bengal 
State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd., for appointment to a number 
of posts vide Notification No. REC/2023/01. 
The said notification includes 30 vacancies for the post of Junior 
Engineer (Civil) Grade II, out of which 1 (one) post was meant for 
unreserved UR (PWD-LV) and 5 (five) posts for Other Backward 
Classes-A (OBC-A)2 as follows.
Sl. Name of 
the post
UR
UR
(EC)
UR
(Ex. 
S)
UR
(MS)
UR
(PWD-
LV)
UR
(PWD-
HH)
UR
(PWD- 
D)
OBC- 
A
OBC- 
A (EC)
OBC- 
B
OBC-
EC
7.
Junior 
Engineer 
(Civil) 
Gr. II
7
4
1
1
1
0
0
5
1
1
1
SC 
(EC)
SC (EC) 
SC 
(Ex-
S) 
ST
(PWD- 
LV)
ST 
ST 
(EC)
Total
33 
2 
1
1
30
There are also two notes below the table as follows: 
* In case of non-availability of qualified UR (PWD-HH) 
candidate, the vacancy will be filled by PWD candidates 
of other categories as per merit.
# In case of non-availability of qualified UR (PWD-LV) 
candidate, the vacancy will be filled by PWD candidates 
of other categories as per merit.
6.	
The aforesaid advertisement shows that while certain number of 
posts are reserved under various social categories (vertical), there 
are reservations for special categories (horizontal) for these social 
categories also, that is, reservation within reservation.
Thus, 7 (seven) posts have been earmarked for the Unreserved 
Category, and further, in the same Unreserved Category, 4 (four) 
posts have been reserved for the special category of EC3 and 1 
(one) post each has been reserved for the special categories of 
Ex-S4, MS5 and PWD-LV. 
2	
OBC-A: Other Backward Class (Most Backward)
3	
EC : Exempted Category
4	
Ex-S : Ex-Servicemen
5	
MS: Meritorious Sportspersons 

606
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
In respect of the social reservation (vertical) category of OBC, it has 
been further sub-categorised into OBC-A and OBC-B, and horizontal 
reservations have also been provided for these two sub-categories. 
Similarly, there are special (horizontal) reservations in respect of SCs 
and STs, with which we are not concerned in this case. 
7.	
Thus, the aforesaid notification indicates both vertical and horizontal 
reservations. 
The horizontal reservation pattern in the aforesaid notification 
indicates “compartmentalised reservations”, not “overall reservations”, 
to use the terms described in Anil Kumar Gupta Vs. State of 
U.P.6, as referred to in Saurav Yadav Vs. State of UP7, where the 
posts reserved for various categories of horizontal reservations are 
distributed among the vertical social reservations. 
8.	
In the present case, we are concerned with the posts of UR (PWD-
LV) and OBC-A. 
The reservation chart, for our convenience, can be shown as follows:
1.
UR (PWD-LV)
(to which the Respondent No.1 belongs)
- 1 post
2.
OBC–A
(to which the Respondent No.3 belongs)
- 5 posts
3.
OBC-A (EC)
- 1 post
4.
OBC-A (PWD-LV)
(to which also the Respondent No. 3 belongs)
- Nil
9.	
While the Respondent No. 1 PWD-LV candidate applied under the 
Unreserved category for the said post of Junior Engineer (Civil) 
Grade-II under UR (PWD-LV) quota, it appears the Respondent 
No. 3 (OBC-A candidate) applied against the said 5 (Five) posts of 
Junior Engineer (Civil) Grade-II under the OBC-A quota. 
It may be noted that there was no horizontal reservation for the 
PWD-LV under the OBC-A category in the said notification. However, 
6	
(1995) 5 SCC 173
7	
(2021) 4 SCC 542

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
607
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
in his application, the Respondent No. 3 also stated that he belongs 
to the PWD (LV) category.
10.	 In the said recruitment process for the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) 
Grade-II, the Respondent No.1 scored 55.667 marks, whereas, the 
Respondent No.3 scored 66.667 marks. Since the Respondent 
No.3 under OBC-A category also belongs to PWD-LV category and 
obtained higher marks than the Respondent No.1, he was offered 
appointment to the aforesaid Unreserved post of UR(PWD-LV) and 
not Respondent No.1. 
11.	 The said offer for appointment in favour of the Respondent No. 3 
was put to challenge by the Respondent No. 1 before the High Court 
at Calcutta through a writ petition, WPA 26312/2023 in view of the 
aforesaid condition in the recruitment notification which stipulated that 
in case of non-availability of qualified UR (PWD-LV) candidate, the 
vacancy will be filled up by PWD candidates of the other categories as 
per merit. The Writ Court, however, after finding that the Respondent 
No. 3 also belonged to the PWD-LV category and had scored more 
marks than the Respondent No. 1, dismissed the said writ petition, 
vide order dated 11.12.2023. 
12.	 Being aggrieved by the dismissal of the writ petition, the Respondent 
No.1 preferred an intra-court appeal before the Division Bench of 
the High Court of Calcutta, which was registered as MAT 69 of 2024 
with CAN 1/2024. 
13.	 The Division Bench of the High Court upon consideration of the 
stipulation in the notification that in case of non-availability of 
qualified UR (PWD-LV) candidate, the vacancy will be filled by PWD 
candidates of other categories as per merit, reversed the decision of 
the Single Bench and allowed the appeal and directed that since the 
Respondent No. 1, who is an unreserved candidate was available, 
should be given appointment to the said post under UR (PWD-LV). 
14.	 The Division Bench of the High Court took the view that considering 
the aforesaid condition in the recruitment notification, as there was 
already available a qualified unreserved PWD-LV candidate in 
the person of the Respondent No. 1, the said vacancy could not 
have been filled up by any other PWD-LV candidate belonging to 
other reserved categories and it should be filled up by a PWD-LV 

608
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
candidate belonging to Unreserved category only. According to the 
Division Bench, it is only when a PWD-LV candidate belonging to 
the Unreserved category is not available that a PWD-LV candidate 
belonging to other reserved categories can be considered for 
appointment. 
15.	 We have perused the recruitment notification no. REC/2023/01. 
The notification mentions that “In case of non-availability of qualified 
UR(PWD-LV) candidate, the vacancy will be filled up by PWD 
candidates of other categories as per merit”. 
The bone of contention between the contesting parties is to be traced 
to the said condition which has been understood differently by the 
Single Bench and Division Bench of the High Court.
16.	 As mentioned above, there were 5 (five) posts reserved for OBC-A 
category in the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) Grade-II. The said 5 
(five) posts reserved for the OBC-A were filled by OBC-A candidates 
in order of merit. The Respondent No. 3 though belonged to OBC-A 
category was not appointed, as it appears that there were more 
meritorious OBC-A candidates above him. 
17.	 However, as the Respondent No. 3 also belonged to the PWD-LV 
category, by virtue of his better merit position than the Respondent 
No. 1, he was offered appointment by the appellant authority to the 
said 1 (one) Unreserved post of UR (PWD-LV). 
18.	 This act of the appellant authority to appoint the Respondent No. 3 
in the post of UR (PWD-LV) was questioned by the Respondent No.1 
before the High Court premised on the condition stipulated in the 
recruitment notification referred to above, by contending that since 
the Respondent No.1 was a qualified PWD-LV under the Unreserved 
category, during his availability, no other candidate from any other 
reserved category could have been considered for appointment, 
and the Respondent No.1 should have been given appointment. 
This contention was dismissed by the Single Bench, but accepted 
by the Division Bench of the High Court. 
19.	 As we proceed to examine the implications of this condition in the 
recruitment notification, we will revisit the law relating to reservation, 
particularly with reference to filling up of unreserved vacancies by 
reserved candidates. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
609
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
20.	 In view of the multifaceted nature of reservation in India, a unique 
service law jurisprudence spurred by Constitutional mandate has 
emerged. Reservations have been classified into two categories, 
namely, vertical and horizontal, with respect to which certain judicial 
norms have evolved through a series of landmark decisions. The 
definitions and interrelationship between the two kinds of reservations 
have been succinctly described in the landmark case of Indra 
Sawhney Vs. Union of India8, in the following words, 
“812. …..the reservations in favour of Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and other backward classes [under 
Article 16(4)] may be called vertical reservations whereas 
reservations in favour of physically handicapped [under 
clause (1) of Article 16] can be referred to as horizontal 
reservations. Horizontal reservations cut across the vertical 
reservations - that is called inter-locking reservations. To be 
more precise, suppose 3% of the vacancies are reserved 
in favour of physically handicapped persons; this would 
be a reservation relatable to clause (1) of Article 16. The 
persons selected against this quota will be placed in the 
appropriate category; if he belongs to S.C. category he will 
be placed in that quota by making necessary adjustments; 
similarly, if he belongs to open competition (O.C.) category, 
he will be placed in that category by making necessary 
adjustments. Even after providing for these horizontal 
reservations, the percentage of reservations in favour of 
backward class of citizens remains - and should remain - 
the same…..”
21.	 In respect of vertical reservation, the social reserved category posts 
are to be filled by the candidates belonging to that social category 
only and not by others. However, with reference to the Unreserved 
or Open category posts, there is no such restrictions as it could be 
filled up by anyone from any category and there could be movement 
from one reserved category to the Unreserved category based on 
merit, which is called mobility in reservation. This movement from 
a reserved category to the unreserved, however, will not affect the 
8	
(1992) Supp. 3 SCC 217

610
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
quota for the reserved category. This principle has been indicated 
by this Court in Indra Sawhney 9 (supra) in the following words, 
“811. In this connection it is well to remember that the 
reservations under Article 16(4) do not operate like a 
communal reservation. It may well happen that some 
members belonging to, say, Scheduled Castes get selected 
in the open competition field on the basis of their own merit; 
they will not be counted against the quota reserved for 
Scheduled Castes; they will be treated as open competition 
candidates.”
22.	 This legal position pertaining to social (vertical) reservation, mobility 
and special (horizontal) reservation has taken firm roots and has 
been restated in clear terms in the case of Saurav Yadav v. State 
of U.P.,10 as follows: 
“59. The features of vertical reservations are:
59.1. They cannot be filled by the open category, or 
categories of candidates other than those specified and 
have to be filled by candidates of the social category 
concerned only (SC/ST/OBC).
59.2. Mobility (“migration”) from the reserved (specified 
category) to the unreserved (open category) slot is possible, 
based on meritorious performance.
59.3. In case of migration from reserved to open category, 
the vacancy in the reserved category should be filled by 
another person from the same specified category, lower 
in rank.
59.4. If the vacancies cannot be filled by the specified 
categories due to shortfall of candidates, the vacancies are 
to be “carried forward” or dealt with appropriately by rules.
60. Horizontal reservations on the other hand, by their 
nature, are not inviolate pools or carved in stone. They 
are premised on their overlaps and are “interlocking” 
9	
(1992) Supp. 3 217
10	
(2021) 4 SCC 542

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
611
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
reservations [ The expression used by B.P. Jeevan 
Reddy,  J., in  Indra Sawhney  v.  Union of India, 1992 
Supp  (3) SCC 217: 1992 SCC (L&S) Supp 1.] . As a 
sequel, they are to be calculated concurrently and along 
with the inviolate “vertical” (or “social”) reservation quotas, 
by application of the various steps laid out with clarity in 
para 21.3. The first rule that applies to filling horizontal 
reservation quotas is one of adjustment i.e. examining 
whether on merit any of the horizontal categories are 
adjusted in the merit list in the open category, and then, in 
the quota for such horizontal category within the particular 
specified/social reservation.
23.	 In the horizontal reservation there is also the concept of overall 
reservation and compartmental horizontal, which has been explained 
in Anil Kumar Gupta11 (supra) in the following manner: 
“15. On a careful consideration of the revised notification 
of 17-12-1994 and the aforementioned corrigendum 
issued by the Lucknow University, we are of the opinion 
that in view of the ambiguous language employed 
therein, it is not possible to give a definite answer to the 
question whether the horizontal reservations are overall 
reservations or compartmentalised reservations. We may 
explain these two expressions. Where the seats reserved 
for horizontal reservations are proportionately divided 
among the vertical (social) reservations and are not 
intertransferable, it would be a case of compartmentalised 
reservations. We may illustrate what we say : take this very 
case; out of the total 746 seats, 112 seats (representing 
fifteen per cent) should be filled by special reservation 
candidates; at the same time, the social reservation in 
favour of Other Backward Classes is 27% which means 
201 seats for OBCs; if the 112 special reservation seats 
are also divided proportionately as between OC, OBC, 
SC and ST, 30 seats would be allocated to the OBC 
category; in other words, thirty special category students 
11	
(1995) 5 SCC 173

612
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
can be accommodated in the OBC category; but say only 
ten special reservation candidates belonging to OBC are 
available, then these ten candidates will, of course, be 
allocated among OBC quota but the remaining twenty seats 
cannot be transferred to OC category (they will be available 
for OBC candidates only) or for that matter, to any other 
category; this would be so whether requisite number of 
special reservation candidates (56 out of 373) are available 
in OC category or not; the special reservation would be a 
watertight compartment in each of the vertical reservation 
classes (OC, OBC, SC and ST). As against this, what 
happens in the overall reservation is that while allocating 
the special reservation students to their respective social 
reservation category, the overall reservation in favour of 
special reservation categories has yet to be honoured. This 
means that in the above illustration, the twenty remaining 
seats would be transferred to OC category which means 
that the number of special reservation candidates in OC 
category would be 56 + 20 = 76. Further, if no special 
reservation candidate belonging to SC and ST is available 
then the proportionate number of seats meant for special 
reservation candidates in SC and ST also get transferred 
to OC category. The result would be that 102 special 
reservation candidates have to be accommodated in the 
OC category to complete their quota of 112. The converse 
may also happen, which will prejudice the candidates in 
the reserved categories. It is, of course, obvious that the 
inter se quota between OC, OBC, SC and ST will not be 
altered.”
24.	 In the present case, though the reservation pattern as indicated in 
the advertisement is of compartmentalised reservation, it may not 
be necessary to dwell on that aspect much further, as the issue 
involved in the present case is only about the mobility of a PWD-LV 
candidate from a reserved category of OBC-A to the Unreserved 
horizontal category of UR(PWD-LV). 
25.	 In the present case, there is no horizontal reservation for the PWD-LV 
category under the social category of the OBC-A category, but there 
is a horizontal reservation for the PWD-LV under the Unreserved or 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
613
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
Open category. The question that arises for consideration is what 
should be the method of filling up such horizontal reservation for 
PWD-LV, which falls under the Unreserved or Open category. 
26.	 The correct answer can be arrived at once we understand the scope 
of reservation for a special category (horizontal) of PWD-LV falling 
under the Unreserved or Open category. 
For this, it is also necessary to understand the meaning and scope 
of the “Unreserved” or “Open” category of reservation.
27.	 In reservation law, it is well settled that Unreserved/Open category 
does not refer to any social/communal category like SCs, STs or 
OBCs. In other words, any post falling under the Unreserved or 
Open category does not pertain to any particular social category; it 
provides an open field or pool meant for the world at large, in the 
sense that it is open to all candidates, irrespective of whether one 
belongs to any social or special category or not. 
28.	 In our view, when we talk of horizontal or special reservation 
pertaining to the Unreserved category, a similar position will prevail. 
This characteristic or attribute of the Unreserved or Open category 
will continue to apply even under the horizontal/special reservation, 
under the Unreserved category only with the exception that it will be 
qualified by the nature of the special category for which it is meant. 
In other words, when the special (horizontal) reservation is applied 
to the Unreserved/Open category, it will be open to all candidates 
irrespective of the social category, provided they are also endowed 
with the character of the same special (horizontal) categorisation. 
Thus, a post earmarked for special (horizontal) reservation under the 
Unreserved category will be open to every candidate possessing the 
attribute or character of the special (horizontal) reservation. 
29.	 The difference in the concept of Unreserved/Open category in the 
vertical, and that in the horizontal reservation under the Unreserved 
category is that, in respect of vertical reservation, the Unreserved/
Open quota does not belong to any of the social categories and is 
open to all irrespective of the social categorisation. On the other 
hand, with respect to the special (horizontal) reservation under the 
Unreserved/Open category, it means that, although it is also open 
to all social categories, such a candidate must also belong to the 
same special (horizontal) category. 

614
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
30.	 Thus, if the Unreserved/Open post is meant for the special category 
of Persons with Disabilities, it means that the said post will be open 
to all candidates of all vertical social categories, whether SC, ST or 
OBC, provided such candidates are also Persons with Disabilities. 
Thus, all candidates, whether SC, ST or OBC, but who are Persons 
with Disabilities, are equally entitled to compete for the post meant 
for Persons with Disabilities falling under the Unreserved category, 
the rationale being that all those who are similarly situated must be 
treated equally. 
31.	 The principle of migration in reservation will be applicable in this 
scenario also. Thus, even though there are candidates under the 
Unreserved category who are Persons with Disabilities, if there are 
more meritorious candidates belonging to any of the social categories 
like SC, ST or OBC who are also Persons with Disabilities, such 
more meritorious persons from the SC, ST or OBC category can 
be appointed against the Unreserved quota meant for Person with 
Disabilities by virtue of merit. 
32.	 This principle has been indicated by this Court in Saurav Yadav12 
(supra) in para 60 therefore, wherein it was held that the first rule that 
applies to filling horizontal reservation quotas is one of adjustment 
i.e. examining whether on merit any of the horizontal categories 
are adjusted in the merit list in the open category, and then, in the 
quota for such horizontal category within the particular specified/
social reservation.
33.	 However, the vice versa will not be true. Thus, if a post is reserved 
for Persons with Disabilities (PWD) for the social category of 
OBC-A, only Persons with Disabilities under the OBC-A category 
can apply, and no other PWD candidates belonging to ST, SC, or 
Unreserved category can be considered, since the reservation is 
compartmentalised. 
34.	 Similarly, candidates belonging to other special (horizontal) categories 
like PWD-HH13 (Hearing impairment) or Ex-Serviceman (Ex.S) or 
Exempted Category (EC) will also not be eligible to apply for the 
12	
(2021) 4 SCC 542
13	
PWD-HH: Person with Disabilities (Hearing Impairment)

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
615
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
post meant for PWD-LV even if it is under the Unreserved category, 
as the said Unreserved post is reserved for PWD-LV category only, 
and not for other horizontal categories like PWD-HH, Ex.S or EC. 
Thus, only those qualified as PWD-LV can be considered.
35.	 In the present case, the Respondent No.3 though belongs to OBC-A 
category also falls under PWD-LV category of horizontal reservation. 
Since the post under Unreserved category is reserved for PWD-LV 
category, the Respondent No.3 has also the right to be considered 
for appointment to the said post of PWD-LV under the Unreserved 
category. The Respondent No.3 can always stake a claim for the 
said post by virtue of being in the category of PWD-LV on the basis 
of merit. Similarly, had there been any other SC or ST candidate 
who also belongs to the PWD-LV category, he could have also been 
considered for the post of UR (PWD-LV). But it appears that there 
were no such PWD-LV candidates from other social categories like 
SC or ST and even if so, were not found meritorious enough to be 
considered. 
36.	 The aforesaid principles have to be kept in mind in understanding the 
implication of the aforesaid condition in the recruitment notification, 
that in case of non-availability of qualified UR (PWD-LV), the vacancy 
will be filled up by other categories of PWD-LV as per merit. 
37.	 This condition has to be read and understood in consonance with 
and not contrary to the well-established principles of law relating 
to appointment to Unreserved posts and the law of migration to 
Unreserved posts.
38.	 Thus, this horizontally reserved post of PWD-LV falling under 
the Unreserved category can be filled by any PWD-LV candidate 
belonging to any social reserved category, as this post of PWD-
LV under the Unreserved category is also open to all PWD-LV 
candidates belonging to any social reserved category. In other 
words, any candidate belonging to any social category can compete 
for this post so long as they belong to the PWD-LV category. The 
principle of mobility will also apply when filling the said post of UR 
(PWD-LV). 
39.	 This legal position is fortified by the other note appended to the 
recruitment notification, which provides that in case of non-availability 
of a qualified UR (PWD-HH) candidate, the vacancy will be filled by 

616
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
PWD candidates of other categories as per merit. Since this post 
of UR (PWD-HH) is reserved for the special category of PWD-HH, 
all such candidates who are also categorised as PWD with Hearing 
disability, belonging to any social category can also apply. 
40.	 It may also be noticed that even though there are other horizontal 
reservations for categories like PWD-LV, EC, Ex-Servicemen in 
respect of other social categories like SC, ST and OBC-B in the 
recruitment notification, no such stipulation is provided for these 
categories but only for the Unreserved category. It is for this reason 
that, with respect to compartmentalised horizontal reservation for 
these social categories, there cannot be any adjustment or migration 
from other social categories. Such vacancies have to be filled up by 
candidates in that particular social category qualifying the specific 
horizontal category. On the other hand, as long as any such horizontal 
reservation is provided for the Unreserved category, it will be open 
to all candidates who also belong to the same special category of 
horizontal reservation.
41.	 The Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court, however, has taken 
the view that this condition in the recruitment notification prevents 
the filling up of the vacancy in the UR (PWD-LV) category from any 
other social category if a qualified unreserved candidate is available. 
This view is not in consonance with the principle as discussed above. 
This view presupposes the fallacious position that ‘Unreserved” 
category is another communal or social or special category as distinct 
from other reserved categories. However, there is no communal or 
social or special category under the nomenclature “Unreserved”. It 
merely denotes the remaining vacancies or percentages of posts 
available after accounting the posts/percentages under different 
reservation categories. The only condition attached to this Unreserved/
Open category in the present case is that it is meant only for 
candidates belonging to the horizontal PWD-LV category, i.e., it is 
specially reserved for persons who are categorised as PWD-LV. 
The Unreserved post/vacancy for PWD-LV is available and open to 
all, irrespective of the social category they may belong to, provided 
they also belong to the same special category of PWD-LV. As the 
said post falls under the Unreserved category, it is to be filled up 
purely on merit. Merit is the co-attendant and inseparable attribute 
of appointment to any post under the “Unreserved” category. As a 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
617
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
consequence, every person belonging to any social reserved category, 
can compete with others, including those under the “Unreserved” 
category and can be appointed against such Unreserved post, so 
long as they belong to the special PWD-LV category, as it is the 
condition that the post under the Unreserved category is reserved 
for the horizontal category of PWD-LV. 
42.	 The individual status of such a reserved candidate as regards his 
social/communal categorisation, however, will remain unaffected for 
all other purposes. For example, if any OBC/SC/ST candidate by 
virtue of his merit is appointed to an Unreserved/Open post by virtue 
of his merit, he will continue to remain in the OBC/ST/SC category 
as the case may be. He would not lose his identity as OBC/SC/
ST for all other purposes, and this will also not affect the extent of 
reservation in respect of his original reserved category. 
43.	 Thus, what is stipulated in the recruitment notification is merely stating 
the obvious. Certainly, if there is no eligible and qualified unreserved 
candidate available under PWD-LV category, this vacancy can be 
filled by anyone belonging to any social reserved category, but 
belonging to PWD-LV category. Thus, it cannot be read to insist that 
so long as any PWD-LV candidate under the Unreserved category 
is available, there will be an absolute bar to consider any other 
meritorious PWD-LV candidate belonging to any of the social reserved 
categories and only such Unreserved category PWD-LV candidate 
can be appointed irrespective of the merit. Such an interpretation, 
as adopted by the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court, flies in 
the face of the well-settled principle of law for filling up Unreserved 
posts and law of migration as discussed above. If any Unreserved 
candidate (belonging to PWD-LV) available, is found to be below 
in merit to any other reserved candidate (belonging to PWD-LV), 
such PWD-LV candidate belonging to the Unreserved category 
cannot steal a march over the more meritorious PWD-LV candidate 
from the reserved category as it would defy the principle of merit, 
which is the sole criterion for appointment under the Unreserved 
category. Therefore, such less meritorious PWD-LV candidate 
under the Unreserved category has to give way to the claim of a 
more meritorious PWD-LV candidate from any other reserved social 
categories for the said post of UR (PWD-LV), as was correctly held 
by the Single Bench of the High Court. Any contrary view would 

618
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
be patently arbitrary being opposed to the equality clause under 
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. 
44.	 Therefore, in our considered opinion, what the aforesaid condition 
in the recruitment notification would mean is that even though 
qualified PWD-LV candidates under the Unreserved category may 
be available, if there is a PWD-LV candidate belonging to other 
social reserved category available who is better in merit than the 
Unreserved PWD-LV candidate available, the said post is to be 
filled up by the more meritorious reserved PWD-LV candidate by 
ignoring the claim of the less meritorious Unreserved candidate by 
virtue of merit. Qua a vacancy/post under “Unreserved” category 
for the PWD-LV candidates, all PWD-LV candidates are equal and 
have similar rights even if they belong to different social reserved 
categories, and the most meritorious amongst them has to be 
preferred. 
45.	 The aforesaid position results from the application of the principle 
enumerated in Saurav Yadav’s14 case wherein this Court explained 
the manner in which horizontal reservation is to be filled, under which 
it has to be first examined whether on merit any of the horizontal 
category can be adjusted in the open category, and then in the quota 
of the horizontal category within the particular social reservation. 
Thus, it has to be ascertained whether the Respondent No. 3 can be 
adjusted against the PWD-LV vacancy in the Unreserved category 
by virtue of his merit, which has been done and was adjusted, as he 
was more meritorious than anyone else including the Respondent 
No. 1 in the Unreserved category. The second situation of adjustment 
against the horizontal category within the social category will not 
arise in the present case, as there is no horizontal reservation for 
the OBC-A category. 
46.	 There is one more aspect of reservation law which may be looked 
into when it relates to migration to the Unreserved category. 
Providing reservation of appointment for posts in favour of any 
backward class of citizens is guaranteed under Article 16 of the 
Constitution of India, and it has also been well settled that the 
14	
(2021) 4 SCC 542

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
619
The West Bengal State Electricity Transmission Co. Ltd & Ors. v. 
Dipendu Biswas & Ors.
reservation is in the nature of affirmative action and is not an exception 
to the principle of equality. Such special provisions have been made 
to provide an equitable setting to level up the weaker sections so 
that the real or factual equality can be ensured and does not remain 
illusory as observed by this Court in Neil Aurelio Nunes (OBC 
reservation) vs. Union of India15. Further in respect of reserved 
categories, the law permits relaxation of certain qualifications for 
appointment, however, subject to the condition that such relaxation 
does not destroy the essential standard requirements, for example, 
as regards requirements relating to age or experience etc. Such 
relaxations have been provided to enable such classes to catch up 
with the rest of the society. Such relaxation, however, will be confined 
for the purposes of appointment within the reserved categories and 
cannot be made applicable for appointment under Unreserved/
Open category for the reason is that in respect of Unreserved/
Open category, the essential qualifications or conditions required 
for recruitment must be equal in all respects and merit being the 
only decisive factor. 
47.	 Thus, a reserved PWD-LV candidate being offered an appointment 
against an Unreserved PWD-LV vacancy/post must not have 
availed any relaxation in the eligibility criteria stipulated for the 
Unreserved PWD-LV category. If he had availed such a relaxation, 
he certainly cannot be considered to be a qualified candidate 
qua the unreserved post, as has been explained by this Court 
in Deepa E.V. vs. Union of India16, reiterated in Union of India 
vs. Sajib Roy17.
48.	 In the present case, nothing has been brought to our notice that the 
Respondent No. 3, though, was more meritorious than the Respondent 
No. 1 had availed any relaxation qua the essential qualifications for 
the said post of UR (PWD-LV). 
49.	 In view of the above discussion, it is clearly evident that the Division 
Bench of the Calcutta High Court had misunderstood the implication 
of the aforesaid condition in the recruitment notification.
15	
(2022) 4 SCC 1
16	
(2017) 12 SCC 680
17	
2025 INSC 1084

620
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
50.	 Consequently, for the reasons discussed above, the appeal succeeds, 
and the impugned judgment and order dated 07.05.2024 passed by 
the Division Bench of the High Court of Calcutta in MAT 69/2024 
with CAN 1 of 2024 is set aside, restoring the decision of the Single 
Bench dated 11.12.2023.
The appeal is accordingly allowed.
Pending application (s) if any, stands disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain


