[2026] 4 S.C.R. 479 : 2026 INSC 339
Russi Fisheries P. Ltd. & Anr.
v.
Bhavna Seth & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 109 of 2010)
09 April 2026
[Pankaj Mithal* and Prasanna. B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose as regards the correctness of the order passed by the 
High Court in the Second Appeal filed by the defendants, whereby 
the judgment passed by the first appellate court was upheld and 
the decree of the specific performance as passed in first appeal 
maintained.
Headnotes†
Specific performance – Relief of – Agreement to sell between the 
parties – Suit for specific performance of an agreement to sell 
filed by the plaintiff, dismissed holding that the plaintiff failed 
to prove his continuous readiness and willingness to perform 
his part of the contract, but decreed it for the refund of sale 
consideration – Appeal by the heirs of the plaintiff – Allowed 
holding that the plaintiff had paid almost half of the amount and 
was ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement – 
Second Appeal by the defendants – Judgment passed by the 
first appellate court upheld and the decree of the specific 
performance as passed in first appeal maintained – Thereafter, 
Special Leave Petition filed wherein leave was granted and the 
same day, heirs of plaintiff got the sale deed executed in their 
favour on the strength of the decree of specific performance 
passed – However, the defendants sold 60 percent of the suit 
land even before the filing of SLP and remaining 40 percent of 
the land sold by them during the pendency of the instant appeal:
Held: Findings of fact howsoever erroneous, cannot be reopened 
and disturbed in second appeal which is required to be adjudicated 
only upon the substantial question of law, if any, arising therein – 
Findings as returned by the First Appellate Court on readiness and 
willingness, extension of time and payment of cash money not 
perverse and illegal, which may warrant any interference – Adverse 
presumption, if any, drawn for non-appearing in the witness box by 
* Author

480
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the plaintiff, is a rebuttal presumption and if the said presumption 
is successfully rebutted by the other cogent evidence on record, 
the said presumption would not be material and applicable – 
PW-4, the Manager of the plaintiff, had appeared as a witness, stated 
that he had been working with the plaintiff since 1988 and had the 
knowledge of all the transactions in relation to the agreement to 
sell – His testimony substantially corroborates the case as set up by 
the plaintiff in the plaint, including execution of agreement, payment 
of consideration and extension of time – Thus, in the light of the 
evidence of the PW-4, the allegations stand corroborated – Adverse 
inference drawn on account of non-appearance of the plaintiff stands 
rebutted by his evidence and other evidence on record – In these 
circumstances, the non-appearance of the plaintiff in the witness 
box not fatal – Agreement to sell was executed in 1988 and the 
decree of specific performance was passed by the first appellate 
court after a gap of 15 years, no evidence whatsoever was brought 
on record to establish that within this period the price of property in 
the area had escalated, making it inequitable to grant the decree 
of specific performance – Sale deeds executed by the defendants 
during the pendency of the litigation hit by doctrine of lis pendens 
and are non est – At the same time, the plaintiffs have got the 
sale deed of the suit land executed in their favour by following 
the due process of law on the basis of the decree of specific 
performance granted in their favour by the first appellate court – In 
such circumstances when the decree has already been executed 
and substantive rights have accrued in favour of the heirs of the 
plaintiff, it would be inequitable to dislodge them from the benefit 
of the sale in exercise of discretionary jurisdiction – Sale deeds 
executed by the defendants held to be non est and the decree as 
passed by the first appellate court maintained. [Paras 31, 41-46]
Case Law Cited
Thomson Press (India) Ltd. vs Nanak Builders & Investors (P) 
Ltd. [2013] 2 SCR 74 : (2013) 5 SCC 397; Bholaram v. Ameerchand 
(1981) 2 SCC 414; Madhavan Nair v. Bhaskar Pillai (Dead) by 
Lrs. (2005) 10 SCC 553; Kashibai w/o Lachiram and Another v. 
Parwatibai w/o Lachiram and Others [1995] Supp. 4 SCR 63 : 
(1995) 6 SCC 213; Kulwant Kaur and Others v. Gurdial Singh 
Mann (Dead) by Lrs and Others [2001] 2 SCR 525 : (2001) 4 SCC 
262; Vidhyadhar v. Manikrao and Another [1999] 1 SCR 1168 : 
(1999) 3 SCC 573; Rajesh Kumar v. Anand Kumar and Others 
[2024] 5 SCR 612 : (2024) 13 SCC 80; Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
481
Russi Fisheries P. Ltd. & Anr. v. Bhavna Seth & Ors.
and Another v. Indusind Bank Ltd. and Other [2004] Supp. 6 SCR 
681 : (2005) 2 SCC 217 – referred to.
List of Acts
Transfer to Property Act, 1882.
List of Keywords
Second Appeal; Decree of the specific performance; Relief of 
specific performance; Agreement to sell; Continuous readiness 
and willingness to perform his part of the contract; Refund of sale 
consideration; Execution of sale deed; Substantial question of law; 
Extension of time; Payment of cash money; Presumption; Adverse 
presumption; Rebuttal presumption; Doctrine of lis pendens.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 109 of 2010
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.01.2009 of the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in RSA No. 3880 of 2003.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
K. Parameshwar, Sr. Adv., Ms. Nina Nariman, Manish Gandhi, Dhiraj 
Abraham Philip, Febin Mathew Varghese, Prasad Hegde,Veda 
Singh, Ms. Lija Merin John, N. Sai Kaushal, Soyarchon Khangrah.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Pawanjit Singh Bindra, Sr. Adv., Sriharsh Nahush Bundela, Ketan 
Madan, Gurmehar Sistani, Naveen Kumar Yadav, Utkarsh Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
This is an appeal arising from a suit for specific performance of an 
agreement to sell.
2.	
The said suit for specific performance was dismissed with the 
alternative relief of refund of the admitted amount paid in advance 

482
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
with interest. The decree passed by the court of first instance was 
reversed in first appeal which judgment and order has been upheld 
by the High Court in Second Appeal.
3.	
One Anil Kishore Seth (since deceased) now represented by his 
heirs and legal representatives1 entered into an Agreement dated 
18.07.1988 with Russi Fisheries (P) Ltd.2 through its Managing 
Director Smt. Surjit Kavaljit Singh3 to purchase agricultural land 
admeasuring 79 Kanals 15 Marlas for a total sale consideration of 
Rs. 15,41,000/-. 
4.	
The aforesaid agreement to sell was executed by defendant No.1 
through its Managing Director, defendant No.2 and was attested 
inter alia by her son Sanjit Kumar Singh4. The aforesaid agreement 
is an unregistered agreement but as the same was not denied, it 
was marked as an Exhibit.
5.	
Under the agreement, time was the essence of the contract and the 
sale deed was to be executed by 15.12.1988. The time for execution 
of the sale deed was twice extended and the last extended time was 
up to 30.06.1989.
6.	
It is alleged that on the last date of the extended time i.e. 30.06.1989, 
the plaintiff attended the office of the Sub-Registrar with the balance 
sale consideration to get the sale deed executed but no one appeared 
on behalf of the defendants to execute the sale deed. Accordingly, 
after service of notice, the plaintiff instituted Civil Suit No. 985/1989 
for specific performance of the agreement to sell dated 18.07.1988 
contending inter alia that under the agreement the total sale 
consideration agreed was Rs. 15,41,000/- out of which Rs. 75,000/- 
was paid by cheque as earnest money; 2,00,000/- by cheque on 
11.11.1988 to the defendant Nos. 2 and 3; thereafter, a sum of Rs. 
2,00,000/- was paid on 01.12.1988 in cash to the defendant No. 3 
and again a sum of Rs. 3,00,000/- on 20.12.1988 to the defendant 
No. 3 when the time for execution of sale deed was first extended 
to 31.01.1989. In this way, the plaintiff allegedly paid Rs. 2,75,000/- 
by cheque and Rs. 5,00,000/- in cash, totaling Rs. 7,75,000/-, and 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as the ‘plaintiff(s)’
2	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘defendant No. 1’
3	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘defendant No. 2’
4	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘defendant No. 3’

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
483
Russi Fisheries P. Ltd. & Anr. v. Bhavna Seth & Ors.
the balance was payable at the time of execution of the sale deed. 
He contended that he was always ready and willing to get the sale 
deed executed and to perform his part of the agreement.
7.	
Defendant Nos.1, 2 and 3 all filed appearance but the suit was 
contested by Defendant Nos. 1 & 2 only by filing a joint written 
statement. They admitted the agreement to sell and the receipt of 
Rs. 2,75,000/- through cheque as part of the sale consideration 
but denied receiving the cash payment and that the plaintiffs were 
never ready and willing to fulfill their part of the agreement. They 
further stated that Defendant No. 3 was not authorized to receive 
any payment on behalf of the defendant No. 1 as he was merely an 
attesting witness to the agreement.
8.	
The court of first instance dismissed the suit for specific performance 
on 10.12.1999 by holding that the plaintiff failed to prove his 
continuous readiness and willingness to perform his part of the 
contract, but decreed it for the refund of sale consideration of Rs. 
2,75,000/-, admitted to have been paid in cheques with interest @ 
12% per annum.
9.	
Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order, the heirs of the 
plaintiff preferred an appeal which was allowed on 23.04.2003 holding 
that the plaintiff had paid Rs. 7,75,000/- and since he attended the 
office of the Sub-Registrar on 30.06.1989, he was ready and willing 
to perform his part of the agreement and as such is entitled to a 
decree of specific performance.
10.	 On Second Appeal being preferred on behalf of the defendants, the 
judgment passed by the first appellate court was upheld. Thus, the 
decree of the specific performance as passed in first appeal was 
maintained.
11.	 The decree of specific performance passed by the first appellate court 
and as upheld by the High Court in Second Appeal was challenged 
by the defendants by filing a Special Leave Petition on 20.08.2009 
before this Court which was duly entertained by granting leave on 
08.01.2010 with an interim order, as prayed for. Therefore, this 
appeal is before us. 
12.	 Despite the fact that the leave was granted in the SLP and an 
interim order was also passed, the heirs of plaintiff through the 
process of the Court on the same very day i.e., 08.01.2010 got the 

484
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
sale deed executed in their favour on the strength of the decree of 
specific performance passed by the first appellate court as affirmed 
in second appeal. 
13.	 It is also pertinent to mention that the defendants sold 60 percent 
of the suit land on 12.02.2009 i.e., even before the SLP was filed 
but during the pendency of the litigation. The remaining 40 percent 
of the land was sold by them during the pendency of this appeal 
on 27.02.2025. Therefore, though on the one hand there is a sale 
deed in favour of the plaintiffs of the suit land, the same also stands 
transferred to third parties by the defendants during the pendency 
of the litigation. 
14.	 In the background of the above transfers of the suit land made by the 
parties, one of the points before this Court would be as to the effect 
and impact of the above transfers on the outcome of the suit itself. 
15.	 We have heard Shri K. Parameshwar, learned senior counsel for the 
defendants and Shri Pawanjit Singh Bindra, learned senior counsel 
for the substituted plaintiffs.
16.	 Shri K. Parameshwar, learned senior counsel appearing for the 
defendants, at the very outset, tenders unconditional apology for not 
disclosing the fact of execution of the sale deeds dated 12.02.2009 
and 27.02.2025, transferring the said land to third parties and submits 
that such an omission in the pleadings had occurred only on account 
of improper advice and the fact that the sale, if any, made would be 
subject to the doctrine of lis pendens. There was no oblique motive 
or any deliberate concealment on the part of the defendants. Further, 
the sale deeds so executed are not void ab initio but are subject to 
the decision of this appeal. In this connection, he relied upon. 
17.	 It is worth noting that the aforesaid transfers have been made 
during the pendency of the litigation and therefore, the same would 
be governed by the principle of lis pendens as enshrined under 
Section 52 of the TP Act and the said transfers have to abide by 
the ultimate decree to be passed in this appeal. In this connection, 
reliance has been placed upon Thomson Press (India) Ltd. vs 
Nanak Builders & Investors (P) Ltd5, wherein the Division Bench 
held that transfer pendente lite is neither illegal nor void ab initio but 
5	
(2013) 5 SCC 397

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
485
Russi Fisheries P. Ltd. & Anr. v. Bhavna Seth & Ors.
remains subservient to the rights of the parties eventually determined 
by court in the pending litigation. In view of the above, whatever 
transfers have been made pending the litigation or this appeal would 
follow the decision passed in this appeal. Therefore, in the facts, we 
ignore the omission and proceed on the merits.
18.	 On merits, Shri K. Parameshwar submits that the grant of relief of 
specific performance of an agreement to sell is an equitable and 
a discretionary relief. The agreement to sell is dated 18.07.1988 
and the first appellate court had decreed the suit on 23.04.2003. In 
between, there was immense increase of price of the land and as 
such it became unequitable with the passage of time to grant the 
relief of specific performance of the agreement. In view of the above, 
he submits it is not justified to uphold the decree after such a long 
distance of time from the date of the agreement. It would be highly 
unequitable to the defendants. 
19.	 He next submitted that the plaintiff had not entered into the witness 
box to prove the plaint allegations despite the fact that he was alive 
until 13.05.1996 and had the opportunity before the court of first 
instance to appear and testify. In the absence of any proof of pleadings 
contained in the plaint, the suit could not have been decreed on the 
basis of the testimony of other witnesses. 
20.	 He further submitted that the plaintiff had only paid a sum of 
Rs.2,75,000/- through cheques and thereafter, there was no payment 
in favour of the defendant no.1-company. The cash payment of 
Rs.2,00,000/- plus Rs.3,00,000/- totaling Rs.5,00,000/- alleged to 
have been paid to the defendant no.3 would not enure to the benefit 
of defendant nos.1 i.e., the Company inasmuch as defendant no.3 
who allegedly accepted the cash payment was never examined as 
a witness and also had no authority to receive the same on behalf 
of the company. 
21.	 Shri K. Parameshwar further submitted that the plaintiff was never 
ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement inasmuch 
as under the agreement dated 18.07.1988, time was the essence 
of the contract and the sale deed was to be executed on or before 
15.12.1988. Further, the defendants have not permitted any 
extension of time and even if the last extended period is treated to 
be up to 30.06.1989, the plaintiff had not given any notice requiring 
the defendants to appear before the office of Sub-Registrar for the 

486
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
execution of the sale deed. The defendants categorically denied 
receiving the notices dated 13.06.1989 and 22.06.1989 alleged to 
have been issued by the plaintiff in this connection. 
22.	 In addition to the above, he submitted that there is no evidence 
to prove that the plaintiff attended the office of the sub-Registrar 
on 30.06.1989. The testimony of PW-4 in this connection, is not 
admissible as there is no document or pleading to verify PW-4’s 
involvement. Further, PW-1, the clerk of the office of the Sub-
Registrar had not and could not have proved the signatures of the 
Sub-Registrar as he was not in the office of Sub-Registrar in 1989 
and had no personal knowledge of the events. Therefore, there was 
no continuous readiness and willingness on part of the plaintiff to 
carry out his obligation under the agreement.
23.	 Lastly, Shri K. Parameshwar submitted that the suit for specific 
performance as filed by the plaintiff was dismissed by the court of first 
instance which decree was reversed by the first appellate court. As 
such, there were two contrary judgments recording conflicting findings 
on the facts as regards to the payment of part of the sale consideration 
as well as on readiness and willingness of the plaintiff. This being the 
position, the High Court was not justified in dismissing the second 
appeal only on the ground that it raises no substantial question of 
law by simply stating that the findings recorded by the First Appellate 
Court are correct in view of the testimony of PW-1 and PW-4 but 
without even considering the statements of the said witnesses which 
do not actually prove what has been held by the first appellate court. 
24.	 Shri Bindra, learned senior counsel on behalf of the plaintiff has 
strongly opposed all the arguments advanced on behalf of the 
defendants aforesaid. He contends that the agreement to sell is an 
admitted document which bears the signatures of both the parties. 
The cash payment receipts are duly signed by the defendant no.3 
and stood proved by the handwriting expert. Moreover, the receipts 
clearly states that the cash payment is being received on behalf 
of the defendant no.1 - company. This sufficiently proves the cash 
transactions.
25.	 Secondly, he submits that even on the letters of extension of time, 
there are signatures of the defendant no.2 – the Managing Director of 
the Company which have not been denied by her rather accepted in 
her cross-examination and further identified and proved by the expert. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
487
Russi Fisheries P. Ltd. & Anr. v. Bhavna Seth & Ors.
26.	 Shri Bindra further submits that the plaintiff had given due notice 
not one but two, dated 13.06.1989 and 22.06.1989 calling upon the 
defendants to attend the office of Sub-Registrar for the execution 
of the sale deed. The defendants were actually aware of the last 
date fixed for the execution of the sale deed and as such they were 
obliged to attend the office of the Sub-Registrar which they failed to 
do. The plaintiff has proved his attendance on the said date before 
the Sub-registrar by moving an application which was duly accepted, 
signed and stamped by the Sub-Registrar. There is no contrary 
evidence to belie the said document. 
27.	 Lastly, he submits that non-appearance of the plaintiff in the witness 
box is not fatal to the suit as his Manager, PW-4 has appeared as a 
witness and has proved the entire transactions as he was working 
with him since before the execution of the agreement. 
28.	 In the end, he sums up by saying that the findings of fact recorded 
by the First Appellate Court are not perverse and are final. Therefore, 
there was no occasion for the Second Appellate Court to re-appraise 
the evidence to examine the correctness of the same. He further 
contends that once a sale deed dated 08.01.2010 had already been 
executed pursuant to the decree of the First Appellate Court which 
has been upheld in second appeal, there is no equity in favour of 
the defendants to get the said sale deed reversed or set aside, 
rather in view of the said sale deed, the sale deeds executed by the 
defendants are void and non est. 
29.	 In the instant case, though an issue was raised before the Court 
of First Instance as to the valid existence of the agreement to sell 
dated 18.07.1988, the said issue upon consideration of the evidence 
adduced by the parties was decided in favour of the plaintiffs but the 
suit was dismissed for the relief of specific performance. Against the 
said finding, the defendants have not filed any cross-objections in 
the appeal preferred by the plaintiff. The said finding was accepted 
even by the First Appellate Court and the suit for specific performance 
was decreed. The defendants preferred second appeal but never 
assailed the finding with regard to existence of the agreement. No 
argument in this regard was raised, thus, conceding that there exists 
a valid agreement to sell. In this view of the matter, the existence of 
the valid agreement to sell dated 18.07.1988 is no longer in dispute. 
Since, the said agreement is acceptable to both the parties and 

488
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
has been marked as an Exhibit, the question as to whether it was 
unenforceable in law for want of registration loses all significance 
and need not be gone into by us. 
30.	 No doubt, the relief of specific performance was not granted by the Court 
of First Instance and only the alternative relief to refund the cheque 
amount of Rs.2,75,000/- paid in advance was granted, nonetheless, 
the findings recorded by the First Court were reversed by the Court of 
First Appeal and categorical findings were recorded that the plaintiffs 
have proved the extension of time for the execution of the sale deed, 
the cash payment of Rs.5,00,000/- and that the plaintiff was always 
ready and willing to get the sale deed executed within time. These 
findings are strictly findings of facts and are not shown to be perverse 
in any manner. They have not been returned on the basis of any 
inadmissible evidence. Therefore, in such a situation it was not open 
for the Second Appellate Court to go into the correctness of those 
findings by reappreciating the evidence adduced by the parties. 
31.	 It is settled in law that the findings of fact howsoever erroneous, cannot 
be reopened and disturbed in second appeal which is required to be 
adjudicated only upon the substantial question of law, if any, arising 
therein. Thus, the argument that the High Court in second appeal 
ought to have examined the evidence to ensure the correctness of 
the findings of the First Appellate Court has no legs to stand and fails.
32.	 Long back in 1981, three judges of this Court in the case of 
Bholaram vs. Ameerchand6 had ruled that even if findings of facts 
by courts below are wrong or grossly inexcusable that by itself would 
not entitle the High Court to interfere under Section 100 CPC in 
the absence of clear error of law. A similar view was reiterated in 
Madhavan Nair vs. Bhaskar Pillai (Dead) by Lrs.7, wherein it has 
been laid down that even if the First Appellate Court commits an 
error in recording a finding of fact, that itself will not be a ground for 
the High Court to upset the same.
33.	 In Kashibai w/o Lachiram and Another vs. Parwatibai w/o 
Lachiram and others8, a similar proposition of law was laid down by 
6	
(1981) 2 SCC 414
7	
(2005) 10 SCC 553
8	
(1995) 6 SCC 213

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
489
Russi Fisheries P. Ltd. & Anr. v. Bhavna Seth & Ors.
this Court and it was held that the High Court cannot reappreciate the 
evidence and interfere with the findings of facts unless a substantial 
question of law or a question of law duly formulated is to be decided. 
The second appeal does not lie on the ground of erroneous findings 
of facts based on appreciation of the relevant evidence. 
34.	 Similar is the situation in the case at hand. The High Court has not 
found any substantial question of law or a question of law worth 
consideration in the second appeal and, therefore, there was no 
occasion for it to have reappreciated the evidence so as to come 
to a different conclusion.
35.	 Again, in Kulwant Kaur and Others vs. Gurdial Singh Mann 
(Dead) by Lrs and Others9, it was emphasized that the fact remains 
that in a second appeal, a finding of fact, even if erroneous, will 
not be disturbed unless it is found that it stands vitiated for want of 
perversity. No such case for interference has been made out in the 
present case.
36.	 Even if we examine the evidence on record for the satisfaction of 
the defendants, we find that the parties have mutually agreed for the 
grant of extension of time to execute the sale deed despite time being 
the essence of the agreement. The documents showing extension 
of time, two of which bear the signatures of not only the defendant 
no.3 but also that of defendant no.2 – the Managing Director of 
the Company – defendant no.1. Significantly, defendant no.2, while 
appearing as DW-1, has admitted her signatures on the agreement 
as well as on other relevant documents, and has also acknowledged 
that the last date of execution was extended till 30.06.1989. No 
concrete or reliable evidence has been adduced to prove that the 
extension of time was granted without taking her consent. Further, 
the handwriting expert also corroborated the genuineness of the 
disputed signatures. Therefore, the finding of the First Appellate 
Court on the above score does not suffer from any material illegality. 
37.	 Secondly, the cash payment was made to the defendant no.3 who is 
none other than the son of defendant no.2 - the Managing Director 
of the Company – defendant no.1. In the receipts issued by him, he 
has categorically stated that he is accepting payment on behalf of the 
9	
AIR (2001) SC 1273

490
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
company in the capacity of being its Director and was authorized to 
receive the same. The narration in the receipts that he is receiving 
payment on behalf of the Company-defendant no.1 as the Director, 
has not been denied by him as he never stepped into the witness 
box. No evidence was brought on record to establish that he was not 
the Director of the Company-defendant no.1. The submission that 
the said receipts were in relation to some other transactions does 
not stand established by any evidence adduced by the defendants. 
Therefore, the finding of the First Appellate Court in this connection 
is justified. 
38.	 Lastly, the period of execution of the sale deed as last extended 
was expiring on 30.06.1989. Therefore, the defendants were under 
an obligation to show that they were also ready and willing to 
execute the sale deed on or before the said date. However, there 
is no positive evidence from their side to prove discharge of their 
obligation. On the other hand, the plaintiffs have issued notices dated 
13.06.1989 and 22.06.1989 to the defendants to attend the office 
of the Sub-Registrar on 30.06.1989 for the execution of the sale 
deed as that was the last day for executing the same. No doubt, 
the said notices were sent to the defendants under certificate of 
posting, which proves that the notices were dispatched. Although, 
that may not be conclusive evidence regarding their service, simply 
denying receiving the notices would not mean that the notices were 
not served, as it is not the allegation of the defendants that they 
were not sent to the proper address. The defendants have not 
adduced any evidence to prove that they were not actually served 
with the said notices. The allegation in this regard by them is only 
a bald allegation. 
39.	 The plaintiff after giving the aforesaid notice had attended the office 
of the of the Sub-Registrar on 30.06.1989 which stand proved by 
his application submitted to the Sub-Registrar on the said very date. 
The application clearly states that he has come prepared and ready 
with the balance sale consideration to get the sale deed executed. 
The receipt of the said application in the office of Sub-Registrar with 
the stamp of the office of the Sub-Registrar is duly proved by the 
evidence of the PW-1. The mere fact that he has not proved the 
signatures of the Sub-Registrar is not sufficient to belie the above 
document when the submission of the application and the stamp 
of the Sub-Registrar stand proved. Moreover, there is no denial 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
491
Russi Fisheries P. Ltd. & Anr. v. Bhavna Seth & Ors.
of the fact or evidence by the defendants that the contents of the 
application are incorrect and that the plaintiff had not attended 
the office with the necessary finances so as to get the sale deed 
executed. The submission that no proof of possessing such finance 
was produced is not material when the allegation in the application 
that the plaintiff has come prepared with the necessary funds is not 
sufficiently denied. 
40.	 In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the findings as 
returned by the First Appellate Court on readiness and willingness, 
extension of time and payment of cash money are not perverse and 
illegal, which may warrant any interference. 
41.	 Now, the crucial issue which remains is about the effect of non-
appearance of the plaintiff in the witness box to prove his plaint case. 
It is an admitted position that the plaintiff himself has not entered 
the witness box and has not offered himself to be cross-examined. 
In such a situation, a presumption can always be drawn against him 
that the case, as pleaded by him, is not correct. In this connection, 
a reference can be made to the decision of this Court in the case 
of Vidhyadhar vs Manikrao and Another10, which lays down that 
where a party does not appear in the witness box, a presumption 
would arise that the case set up by him is not correct. This Court 
in laying down as aforesaid has referred to various decisions of the 
High Court. The decisions of the High Court are also to the effect 
that when a party fails to appear as a witness, it gives rise to an 
adverse inference and nothing more.
42.	 The adverse presumption, if any, drawn for non-appearing in the 
witness box by the plaintiff, is a rebuttal presumption and if the 
aforesaid presumption is successfully rebutted by the other cogent 
evidence on record, the said presumption would not be material 
and applicable. In the present case, PW-4, the Manager of the 
plaintiff, had appeared as a witness. He has stated that he had been 
working with the plaintiff since 1988 and had the knowledge of all the 
transactions in relation to the agreement to sell dated 18.07.1988. 
His testimony substantially corroborates the case as set up by the 
plaintiff in the plaint, including execution of agreement, payment of 
consideration and extension of time. Therefore, in the light of the 
10	
(1999) 3 SCC 573

492
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
evidence of the PW-4, the plaint allegations stand corroborated. 
The adverse inference drawn on account of non-appearance of 
the plaintiff stands rebutted by his evidence and other evidence on 
record. In these circumstances, the non-appearance of the plaintiff 
in the witness box would not be fatal in this case. 
43.	 In the recent case of Rajesh Kumar vs Anand Kumar and Others11 
in which one of us (P. Mithal, J) was a party, relying upon Janki 
Vashdeo Bhojwani and Another vs Indusind Bank Ltd. and 
Other12, it was held that a power of attorney holder may depose on 
behalf of the principal in respect of such acts which are within his 
personal knowledge but he cannot certainly depose for the principal, 
for the acts done by the principal and not known personally by him. 
Applying the same analogy, the Manager, PW-4 herein had deposed 
about the entire transaction based upon his personal knowledge as he 
was attached to the plaintiff as the Manager. In such circumstances, 
his evidence cannot be discarded.
44.	 This takes us to the last limb of the argument of the parties with regard 
to the equitable and discretionary jurisdiction of the court to grant the 
relief of specific performance. No doubt, the agreement to sell was 
executed on 18.07.1988 and the decree of specific performance was 
passed by the First Appellate Court on 23.04.2003, after a gap of 15 
years, no evidence whatsoever was brought on record to establish 
that within this period the price of property in the area had escalated, 
making it inequitable to grant the decree of specific performance.
45.	 The sale deeds executed by the defendants during the pendency 
of the litigation are certainly hit by doctrine of lis pendens and are 
non est. At the same time, the plaintiffs have got the sale deed of 
the suit land executed in their favour by following the due process 
of law on the basis of the decree of specific performance granted 
in their favour by the First Appellate Court. In such circumstances 
when the decree has already been executed and substantive rights 
have accrued in favour of the heirs of the plaintiff, it would be 
inequitable to dislodge them from the benefit of the sale in exercise 
of discretionary jurisdiction.
11	
(2024) 13 SCC 80
12	
(2005) 2 SCC 217

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
493
Russi Fisheries P. Ltd. & Anr. v. Bhavna Seth & Ors.
46.	 Accordingly, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we find 
no merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed. The sale deeds 
executed by the defendants on 12.02.2009 and 27.02.2025 are held 
to be non est and the decree as passed by the First Appellate Court 
is maintained.
Result of the case: Appeal dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
