[2026] 4 S.C.R. 503 : 2026 INSC 346
Mamta Devi 
v.
Sanjay Kumar
(Civil Appeal No. 4391 of 2026)
10 April 2026
[Vikram Nath* and Sandeep Mehta, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Challenge by the appellant-wife to the decree of divorce granted 
to the respondent-husband on the ground of cruelty and desertion.
Headnotes†
Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 – ss.13(1) (ia) and 13(1) (ib) – Divorce 
granted by Family Court holding that the conduct of the 
appellant-wife amounted to cruelty and that the respondent-
husband had also succeeded in establishing desertion – 
Appeal preferred by the appellant was dismissed – High Court 
affirmed the findings recorded by the Family Court as also the 
decree of divorce – Interference with, if warranted:
Held: No – Marriage between the parties was solemnized in 
the year 2002 and they have admittedly been living separately 
since 2018 – Matrimonial bond has broken down beyond repair 
and there is no possibility of resuming cohabitation – On facts, 
the conduct attributed to the appellant amounted to cruelty and 
she had withdrawn from the society of the respondent without 
reasonable cause – Findings recorded by Courts below are findings 
of fact based on appreciation of evidence – No perversity has 
been demonstrated so as to warrant any interference – However, 
respondent to pay a sum of Rs.10,000/- per month to the appellant 
towards maintenance, as opposed to a lump sum of Rs.6,00,000/- 
as directed by the Family Court at the time of granting divorce. 
[Paras 7-9, 11]
List of Acts
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
* Author

504
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
List of Keywords
Section 13(1)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955; Section 
13(1)(ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955; Divorce; Cruelty; 
Desertion; Matrimonial bond broken down beyond repair; No 
possibility of resuming cohabitation; Prolonged separation; Findings 
of fact based on appreciation of evidence. 
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4391 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 4.10.2023 of the High Court 
of Jharkhand at Ranchi in FA No. 9 of 2023.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Gautam Jha, Pankaj Kumar, Sumit Kumar.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
George Pothan Poothicote, Kanav Khatana, Ms. Ojeswita Singh, 
Ms. Swati Yadav, Danish Zubair Khan.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Vikram Nath, J. 
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The appellant is aggrieved by the judgment and order of the High 
Court of Jharkhand dated 04.10.2023 passed in F.A. No. 9/2023 
whereby the High Court dismissed the appeal preferred by the 
appellant-wife1 and affirmed the judgment passed by the Family 
Court granting divorce to the respondent-husband.2 
3.	
The relevant facts giving rise to the present appeal are as follows:
3.1.	 The appellant and respondent got married on 24.02.2002 at 
Bokaro, Jharkhand in accordance with Hindu rites and customs. 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘appellant’. 
2	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘respondent’.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
505
Mamta Devi v. Sanjay Kumar
Two children, a son and a daughter, were born out of the wedlock 
in 2003 and 2005 respectively. 
3.2.	 After marriage, the parties resided in the matrimonial home 
along with the parents of the respondents, at Bokaro. 
3.3.	 According to the appellant, disputes arose between the parties 
and she was subjected to cruelty, including harassment on 
account of dowry demands. She stated that around the year 
2007, the parties began residing separately from the joint family 
along with the children. The appellant further alleged that the 
respondent got her examined by a psychiatrist with the intention 
of portraying her as mentally unstable. She also contended that 
she was ultimately driven out of the matrimonial home by the 
respondent and his family members. 
3.4.	 On the other hand, the respondent alleged that the appellant 
persistently insisted on living separately from the joint family 
and that even after the parties shifted to a separate residence, 
there was no improvement in her conduct. He further alleged 
that the appellant used abusive language towards his parents 
on several occasions and was also involved in disputes with the 
landlord. The respondent asserted that he had been subjected 
to continuous mental and physical harassment over the years 
and that the matrimonial relationship between the parties had 
irretrievably broken down.
3.5.	 Several complaints were filed by the parties against each other. 
3.6.	 The respondent filed O.S. (DP) 486/2018 seeking divorce 
under sections 13(1)(ia) and 13(1)(ib) of the Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955. 
3.7.	 By order dated 23.11.2022, the Family Court, Bokaro allowed 
the divorce petition and granted a decree of divorce in favour 
of the respondent. 
3.8.	 Aggrieved thereby, the appellant preferred First Appeal No. 9 
of 2023 before the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi.
3.9.	 The High Court, by the impugned judgment and order dated 
04.10.2023, dismissed the appeal and affirmed the decree of 
divorce granted by the Family Court.

506
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
3.10.	 Aggrieved by the dismissal of the appeal, the appellant has 
preferred the present appeal.
4.	
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have examined 
the material placed on record. 
5.	
The Family Court upon appreciation of oral and documentary 
evidence led by the parties, recorded a finding that the respondent 
had established cruelty and desertion within the meaning of Sections 
13(1) (ia) and 13(1) (ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956. The Court 
noted that the appellant used to quarrel with the respondent on trivial 
issues, resulting in persistent matrimonial discord. The Court further 
took note of complaints made regarding the conduct of the appellant 
towards the respondent as well as the children. It also noted that 
the matter was examined by the District Welfare Committee, which, 
upon consideration of the allegations, directed that the children 
reside with their paternal grandfather. The Family Court also noted 
that despite the parties living separately, the appellant had neither 
instituted proceedings for restitution of conjugal rights nor taken 
steps for custody of the children. On consideration of the aforesaid 
circumstances, the Family Court concluded that the conduct of the 
appellant amounted to cruelty and that the respondent had also 
succeeded in establishing desertion.
6.	
The High Court in appeal referred to the aforesaid evidence and 
affirmed the findings recorded by the Family Court. The Court referred 
to the undertaking furnished by the appellant pursuant to a complaint 
dated 03.02.2017 made by her mother-in-law alleging torture and 
harassment, wherein the appellant had stated that she would maintain 
cordial relations with her husband and parents-in-law and would not 
give any cause for complaint in future. The High Court observed that 
these facts were not denied by the appellant and treated the same 
as indicative of her conduct. The High Court further relied upon the 
testimony of the son of the parties, who supported the allegations 
of cruelty and expressed unwillingness to reside with the appellant. 
The Court also noticed the appellant’s statement that she did not 
want the children to stay with her. Taking into account the aforesaid 
circumstances, the High Court concluded that the conduct attributed 
to the appellant constituted cruelty towards the respondent and 
that she had withdrawn from his society without reasonable cause, 
thereby affirming the decree of divorce. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
507
Mamta Devi v. Sanjay Kumar
7.	
Having gone through the record, we are of the opinion that the 
findings recorded by Courts below are findings of fact based on 
appreciation of evidence. No perversity has been demonstrated so 
as to warrant the interference of this Court. 
8.	
It is relevant to note that the marriage between the parties was 
solemnized in the year 2002 and the parties have admittedly been 
living separately since 2018. The prolonged separation indicates that 
the matrimonial bond has broken down beyond repair and there is 
no possibility of resuming cohabitation. 
9.	
The High Court has also taken into consideration the material 
indicating strained relations between the appellant and the children. 
These circumstances were cumulatively relied upon by the courts 
below to conclude that the conduct attributed to the appellant 
amounted to cruelty and that she had withdrawn from the society 
of the respondent without reasonable cause.
10.	 The findings so recorded are findings of fact based on appreciation 
of evidence. In the aforesaid circumstances, we are not inclined to 
take a view different from that taken by the High Court. 
11.	 However, insofar as the issue of financial support to the appellant 
is concerned, it has been urged before us that the amount awarded 
requires reconsideration. Family Court at the time of granting divorce, 
directed the respondent to pay appellant a lump sum of Rs.6,00,000/- 
as maintenance. Having regard to the nature of the relief granted 
and the need to ensure continued financial support to the appellant, 
and considering the overall facts and circumstances of the case, we 
deem it appropriate in the interest of complete justice to direct the 
respondent to pay a sum of Rs.10,000/- per month to the appellant 
towards maintenance, payable from the date of this order.
12.	 Accordingly, the appeal is disposed of. 
13.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall be disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
