[2026] 4 S.C.R. 331 : 2026 INSC 312
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd
v.
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 4152 of 2026)
02 April 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Alok Aradhe, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the black listing order, in the instant case, suffers from 
patent infirmities; whether the blacklisting, being stigmatic and 
exclusionary in nature, can be imposed mechanistically.
Headnotes†
Contract – Termination – Blacklisting – The appellant, 
a registered contractor with the Water and Sanitation 
Department was contracted for construction of an Elevated 
Service Reservoir (ESR) by issuance of a Letter of 
Acceptance (LOA) on 06.03.2023 – During the subsistence 
of the contract, on 01.06.2024, the top dome of the reservoir 
collapsed – Department issued a show cause notice dated 
04.06.2024 seeking explanation as to why action should not 
be taken for the negligence and bad quality of work – Upon 
receiving concurrent reports indicating negligence on part 
of appellant, respondent no. 3, Chief Engineer, Drinking 
Water and Sanitation Department, passed the termination 
cum blacklisting order dated 23.08.2024 – Aggrieved, the 
appellant filed an appeal, which was dismissed by the 
Appellate Authority – Appellant filed writ petition, which was 
also dismissed – Correctness:
Held: In view of the clear findings of negligence as articulated in the 
order of termination, this Court will not interfere with the decision 
of termination – In so far as the order relating to blacklisting is 
concerned, the blacklisting order suffers from patent infirmities: it 
evinces no application of mind, disregards the mandatory precept of 
audi alteram partem, and fails to precede with a show-cause notice 
requiring the contractor to demonstrate why such drastic action 
should not be taken – Blacklisting, being stigmatic and exclusionary 

332
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in nature, cannot be imposed mechanistically but must comport with 
principles of natural justice and reasonableness – The final order 
of blacklisting, dated 23.08.2024, does not list the reasons as to 
why an order of blacklisting has become necessary – A blacklisting 
order assumes that the contractor is an incorrigible entity, at least 
for some time to come, in this case such an assumption was 
intended to operate for five years – For giving effect to such a 
premise, there has to be sufficient evidence, clear application of 
mind and stronger adherence to principles of natural justice – The 
blacklisting order dated 23.08.2004 falls short of this requirement 
and is liable to be set aside – Thus, the decision of blacklisting of 
the appellant is illegal, arbitrary and unreasonable – The declaration 
of blacklisting is set aside. [Paras 15, 16, 3, 23, 25]
Contract – Termination – Blacklisting:
Held: The contractual conditions governing termination on the one 
hand and those that relate to blacklisting on the other are distinct 
and will be exercised independently – A decision of blacklisting 
is not automatic and certainly not a logical consequence of a 
decision of termination – Even after the Department decides 
to terminate the contract, there is still a choice of exercising 
the power of blacklisting  – These decisions operate in two 
dimensions-past and subsisting for termination and future for 
blacklisting – In other words, an order of blacklisting transcends 
the existing contract and debars the contractor from contracts that 
could probably be executed in the next five years – In view of 
the serious consequences, it is necessary for the Department to 
issue a specific notice proposing blacklisting of a contractor and 
call for an explanation as to why an order of blacklisting should 
not be passed. [Para 18]
Case Law Cited
Erusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, 
[1975] 2 SCR 674 : (1975) 1 SCC 70; UMC Technologies Pvt 
Ltd v. Food Corporation of India [2020] 13 SCR 1175 : (2021) 2 
SCC 551; M/s Techno Prints v. Chhattisgarh Textbook Corporation 
& Anr., 2025 INSC 236 : [2025] 3 SCR 208 – relied on.
Raghunath Thakur v. State of Bihar, [1988] 3 Supp. SCR 867 : 
(1989) 1 SCC 229; Gorkha Security Services v. Govt. (NCT of Delhi) 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
333
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
[2014] 13 SCR 617 : (2014) 9 SCC 105; Kulja Industries Ltd. v. 
Chief General Manager, Western Telecom Project BSNL [2013] 
14 SCR 430 : (2014) 14 SCC 731; The Blue Dreamz Advertising 
Pvt Ltd. & Anr. v. Kolkata Municipal Corporation & Ors., 2024 
INSC 589 : [2024] 8 SCR 189 – referred to.
List of Acts
Contractor Registration Rules, 2012.
List of Keywords
Contract; Termination; Blacklisting; Audi alteram partem; Negligence; 
Principles of natural justice; Show-cause notice; Non-application 
of mind; Reasonableness.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4152 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 07.02.2025 of the High Court 
of Jharkhand at Ranchi in WPC No. 6886 of 2024.
With
Civil Appeal No. 4153 of 2026.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
M.S. Ganesh, Sr.Adv., R. Ayyam Perumal, Ms. Archana Sharma, 
Rao Raj Bahadur Singh, A. Sai Kumar.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Kumar Anurag Singh, Jayant Mohan, Ms. Meenakshi Chatterjee, 
Zain A. Khan, Ms. Adya Shree Dutta, Ms. Dorjee Ongmu Lachungpa, 
Priyanshu Teotia, Dev Aaryan, Mohd. Abran Khan.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
Leave granted. 
2.	
While exercising judicial review over administrative actions of the State 
and its instrumentalities in relation to contracts provisioning clauses 

334
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and rules relating to termination and/or blacklisting, Courts must apply 
distinct standards of legality, rationality and proportionality. Such an 
approach is compelling as conditions for imposing such measures, 
as also the consequences of such actions, have differing gravity.
3.	
Upon careful consideration of the impugned State action, which 
terminates the contract and blacklists the appellant without meaningful 
distinction, we hold that the termination order is substantiated and 
justified. However, the blacklisting order suffers from patent infirmities: 
it evinces no application of mind, disregards the mandatory precept of 
audi alteram partem, and fails to precede with a show-cause notice 
requiring the contractor to demonstrate why such drastic action 
should not be taken. Blacklisting, being stigmatic and exclusionary 
in nature, cannot be imposed mechanistically but must comport with 
principles of natural justice and reasonableness.
4.	
For the reasons detailed hereafter, we uphold the order of termination 
and the impugned judgement and review order affirming the same, 
but set aside the decision to blacklist the appellant.
5.	
Having upheld the order of termination, we were of the opinion 
that the assumed logical consequence of blacklisting is neither 
supported by application of mind nor followed by a clear notice 
proposing blacklisting. For the reasons to follow, we set aside the 
order of blacklisting. However, in the facts and circumstances of the 
case, due to passage of time, we have suitably moulded the relief 
and directed that the order of blacklisting shall not continue for five 
years as directed by the Department but will cease to operate from 
the date of our judgment. 
Facts
6.	
The appellant, a registered contractor with the Water and Sanitation 
Department was contracted for construction of an Elevated Service 
Reservoir (ESR) by issuance of a Letter of Acceptance (LOA) on 
06.03.2023. During the subsistence of the contract, on 01.06.2024, 
the top dome of the reservoir collapsed. Though it was justified as 
being a result of an unexpected cyclone, the appellant offered to 
reconstruct it at own expense. However, the Department issued a 
show cause notice dated 04.06.2024, seeking explanation as to why 
action should not be taken for the negligence and bad quality of work. 
The contents of the show cause notice are as follows - 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
335
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
“(PURPOTED SHOW CAUSE)
GOVERNMENT OF JHARKHAND
DRINKING WATER & SANITATION DEPARTMENT
Letter No. 4/A.V.-01-1019/2024-1311
From,
Navneet Kumar
Under Secretary to the Government.
To,
M/s. A.K.G. Construction & Developers
Pvt. Ltd. Ranchi.
Ranchi, Date- 4/6/24
Subject: Regarding submitting clarification.
Context: Letter No. 727 of Executive Engineer, Drinking 
Water and Sanitation Division, Jhumritilaiya, dated 
01.06.2024.
Sir,
As per the directions, the department received information 
about collapse of the under-construction water tower in 
Neemadhi village under Koderma-Demchonch Jaynagar 
Mega Rural Water Supply Scheme through the relevant 
letter on the above subject.
The collapse of the under-construction water tower proves 
that quality was not taken care of in the construction of 
the water tower.
Due to your not doing quality work as per the agreement 
in the construction of the water tower, the water tower 
collapsed due to which the image of the department got 
tarnished.
Therefore, it is directed by attaching a copy of the letter 
describing tire incident that why action should not be taken 
against you as per rules for negligence shown by you and 
not doing quality construction and, ensure to submit your 
explanation within 03 (three) days. In case of not receiving 
the explanation on time, it will be considered that you have 

336
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
nothing to say regarding the allegation and the department 
will be free to take unilateral action.
Translation- As Aforesaid
Yours sincerely,
Sd./-Illegible
04/06/2024
(Navneet Kumar)
Under Secretary to the Government.”
7.	
Following the show cause notice, multi-level enquiries were 
conducted. Initially, a three-member committee gave its report on 
06.06.2024. Thereafter, the Superintending Engineer also examined 
the matter in detail. These enquiries drew inputs from Birsa Institute 
of Technology, Sindri and also IITs of Delhi, Madras and Bombay. 
Upon receiving concurrent reports indicating negligence on part of 
the appellant, respondent no. 3, Chief Engineer, Drinking Water and 
Sanitation Department, passed the termination cum blacklisting order 
dated 23.08.2024. The order containing the reasons for termination 
and blacklisting is reproduced below for ready reference;
“GOVERNMENT OF JHARKHAND
DRINKING WATER & SANITATION DEPARTMENT
Order No.-4/A.V.-01-102l/2024-20(CDO), Ranchi, 
Date- 23/08/2024
ORDER
It was informed by letter no. 727 dated 01.06.2024 of 
Executive Engineer, Drinking Water and Sanitation Division, 
Jhumritilaiya that the water tower under construction in 
Neemadhi village under the work of Koderma-Domchonch 
Jaynagar Large Rural Water Supply Scheme, which is 
allotteed to the contractor M/s A.K.G. Construction & 
Developers Pvt. Ltd., Ranchi, collapsed on 01.06.2024. 
In the light of the above, the contractor was asked 
for clarification by departmental letter no. 1311 dated 
04.06.2024, in the light of which the contractor submitted 
clarification through letter no. AKG/24-25/26 dated 
06.06.2024 in which the contractor has reported that no 
laxity has been shown in the construction of the under-
construction water tower and the under-construction water 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
337
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
tower fell due to natural disaster/cyclonic storm. In the light 
of the above, by letter no. 663 (CDO) dated 21.06.2024 
of this office, the Superintending Engineer, Drinking Water 
and Sanitation Zone, Hazaribagh was directed to review 
the clarification received from the contractor point by point 
and provide a report with his clear opinion. The opinion 
was provided by letter no. 545 dated 21.06.2024 of the 
Superintending Engineer, Drinking Water and Sanitation 
Zone, Hazaribagh in which it is reported that the work 
described has not been done as per the approved Design 
& Drawing and the quality of the overall work has not been 
taken care of. 
In the matter described by the department, an inquiry was 
conducted by a three-member inquiry committee. The 
inquiry committee submitted the inquiry report through 
departmental G.S.P. No.-283 dated 06.06.2024 in which 
it is reported that negligence was shown in getting the 
construction work of the water tower completed as per the 
approved Design & Drawing and quality was not taken care 
of, due to which the incident of collapse/demolition of the 
water tower occurred. Thus, the contractor is responsible/
guilty for negligence and negligence in getting the quality 
work done. 
The contractor informed the concerned Executive Engineer 
through his letter-AKG/24-25/23 dated-01.06.2024 that he 
is ready to construct ESR again at his own expense in 
place of the demolished ESR under construction. It was 
never appropriate for him to construct ESR again without 
departmental order. This act of his reflects an attempt to 
hide his wrongdoings. 
The department condemns this modus operandi of the 
contractor.
It is clear from the above that the contractor got low 
quality construction work done in the work of the scheme, 
which tarnished the image of the department and created 
obstacles in achieving the objectives of the department. 
This is a clear violation of rule number-10.1.8 and 10.1.15 
of the Contractor Registration Rules 2012. Therefore, 

338
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
after review by the department, the explanation of the 
contractor is rejected.
Therefore, after due consideration by the department in 
the light of Rule No. 10.1.8 and 10.01.15 of Contractor 
Registration Rules 2012, the contractor M/s A.K.G. 
Construction & Developers Pvt. Ltd., Panna Enclave, Flat 
No-202, Kadru, Ranchi-834002, e-mail: ketan.kumar007@
gmail.com is blacklisted for 5 (five) years with immediate 
effect and in this context, the following order is given in the 
light of Rule No. 10.3 and 10.4 of Contractor Registration 
Rules 2012:-
2. It is decided to stop all the works being done by the 
contractor from the date of issuance of the order and 
to confiscate the security deposit of all the works. Also, 
the concerned regional Chief Engineer/Superintending 
Engineer/Executive Engineer will ensure to take appropriate 
action as per the requirement to complete the remaining 
work being done by the contractor. 
3. The registration of the contractor in all categories in the 
department is cancelled with immediate effect.
4. The proposal has received the approval of the Hon’ble 
Departmental Minister.
(Prabhat Kumar Singh) 
Chief Engineer, C.D.O 
Date: 23/08/2024”
8.	
Aggrieved, the appellant filed an appeal, which came to be dismissed 
vide order dated 05.12.2024 of the Appellate Authority cum Principal 
Secretary, Drinking Water and Sanitation Department. The appellant 
filed a writ petition challenging orders dated 23.08.2024 and 
05.12.2024. By impugned judgement and order dated 07.02.2025, 
the High Court dismissed the writ petition, while also imposing a cost 
of Rs. 2 lakhs on the appellant. It was held that the corroborated 
findings of the enquiries conducted, as also the appellant’s own 
admission in the form of offering to reconstruct the entire ESR at 
its own cost, leads to a logical inference of negligence in carrying 
out the construction as per the approved design and drawings. It 
was also held that the orders impugned were neither illegal nor 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
339
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
arbitrary as proper opportunity was given to the appellant at every 
stage. 
9.	
The appellant sought a review of the decision arrived by the High 
Court on self-same grounds, which naturally came to be dismissed 
by the High Court vide impugned order dated 04.08.2025. Thus, the 
present appeals have been filed against the main judgement as well 
as the review order.
Submissions
10.	 Mr. M.S. Ganesh, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the 
appellant, would submit that the termination as well as the blacklisting 
are illegal and arbitrary. He would submit that constitution of the three-
member committee, followed by its report and subsequent reports, 
were without giving any opportunity to the appellant. He would also 
submit that the arbitrariness is writ large as the decision to blacklist 
had the effect of terminating all subsisting contracts. 
11.	 Mr. Kumar Anurag Singh, learned counsel for the respondent 
Department would submit that Clause 59 of the General Conditions 
of Contract (GCC), dealing with termination of contract does not 
provide for a prior notice. He would also rely on Rule 10 of the 
Contractor Registration Rules, 2012, dealing with blacklisting, which 
mandates issuance of a show cause notice before blacklisting a 
contractor upon misconduct. He would submit that the show cause 
notice 04.06.2024 was specifically for purpose of blacklisting the 
appellant, which according to him, is further cemented by express 
use of the phrase “why action should not be taken against it as 
per the rules”. In view of the concurrent operation of GCC and 
the 2012 Rules, he submits that the common order of termination 
cum blacklisting is compliant of all conditions and therefore legal 
and valid. 
Analysis
12.	 The controversy revolves around a true and correct interpretation 
of Clause 59 of GCC, relating to termination, and Rule 10 of 2012 
Rules, relating to blacklisting. The Clause and the Rule is reproduced 
herein for ready reference.
13.	 Clause 59 of GCC is as follows - 

340
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“59.Termination
59.1. The Employer or the Contractor may terminate the 
Contract if the other party causes a fundamental breach 
of the Contract.
59.2. Fundamental breaches of Contract include, but shall 
not be limited to the following:
(a) The Contractor stops work for 28 days when no 
stoppage of work is shown on the current Programme and 
the stoppage has not been authorized by the Engineer;
(b) The Engineer instructs the Contractor to delay the 
progress of the Works and the instruction is not withdrawn 
within 28 days;
(c) The Employer or the Contractor is made bankrupt or 
goes into liquidation other than for a reconstruction or 
amalgamation.
(d) The Engineer gives Notice that failure to correct a 
particular Defect is a fundamental breach of Contract and 
the Contractor fails to correct it within a reasonable period 
of time determined by the Engineer.
(e) The Contractor does not maintain a security which is 
required;
(f) The Contractor has delayed the completion of works 
by the number of days for which the maximum amount of 
liquidated damages can be paid as defined in the Contract 
data; and 
(g) If the Contractor, in the judgment of the Employer has 
engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices in competing 
for or in executing the Contract.
For the purpose of this paragraph: “corrupt practice” means 
the offering, giving, receiving or soliciting of anything of 
value to influence the action of a public official in the 
procurement process or in contract execution. “Fraudulent 
practice” means a misrepresentation of facts in order to 
influence a procurement process or the execution of a 
contract to the detriment of the Borrower, and includes 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
341
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
collusive practice among Bidders (prior to or after bid 
submission) designed to establish bid prices at artificial 
non-competitive levels and to deprive the Borrower of the 
benefits of free and open competition.”
59.3. When either party to the Contract gives notice of a 
breach of contract to the Engineer for a cause other than 
those listed under Sub Clause 59.2. above, the Engineer 
shall decide whether the breach is fundamental or not.
59.4. Notwithstanding the above, the Employer may 
terminate the Contract for convenience.
59.5. If the Contract is terminated the Contractor shall 
stop work immediately, make the Site safe and secure and 
leave the Site as soon as reasonably possible”
14.	 Rule 10 of Contractor Registration Rules, 2012 is as follows - 
“10. BLACKLISTING
10.1 A contractor in person or any partner of a registered 
firm or any director of a private public limited company or 
his technical staff or any of his authorized representatives, 
registered in any of the above categories, may be 
blacklisted for any of the following misconducts:
10.1.1 Creating law and order problem in Government 
office while receiving tender documents, submitting tender 
documents or doing any work related thereto.
10.1.2 Intimidating or assaulting concerned officer or 
employee.
10.1.3 If the contractor is found selling or misusing 
Government goods such as cement, steel and pipes etc..
10.1.4 If convicted in any criminal activity.
10.1.5 If wrong documents are submitted for registration 
under these rules.
10.1.6 In case of being banned or blacklisted by any 
department/undertaking of the Government of India or 
any State Government.
10.1.7 In case of violation of Rule 6.2 of these rules.

342
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
10.1.8 Failure to execute the work as per the agreement 
and prescribed specifications.
10.1.9 In case of the contractor handing over his work to 
another contractor or any person without departmental 
order (subletting).
10.1.10 No improvement is reflected in the conduct of the 
suspended contractor.
10.1.11 Corrupting or attempting to corrupt the tender 
process.
10.1.12 indulging in malpractices likes bribery, corruption 
or fraud.
10.1.13 any such act which obstructs the achievement of 
the objectives of the works department.
10.1.14 applying political pressure directly or indirectly.
10.1.15 doing work of poor quality.
10.1.16 directly or indirectly threatening or intimidating 
departmental officers/employees.
10.1.17 not achieving physical targets in proportion to the 
time elapsed.
10.2 The blacklisted contractor will be debarred from 
working in any Government Department / Undertaking in 
future and his registration will be cancelled with immediate 
effect.
10.3 If a registered contractor is blacklisted in any one 
category in the light of Rule 10.1, then the registration of 
the said contractor in all other categories, if any, will also 
be deemed to be cancelled with immediate effect.
10.4 All the works being carried out by the blacklisted 
contractor in the Department of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation, Jharkhand will be stopped from the date of 
the order issued in the light of Rule 10.1, and the security 
deposit of all the works will be forfeited and appropriate 
action will be taken as per requirement to complete the 
remaining works.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
343
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
10.5. Before blacklisting a contractor of a particular 
category, it will be necessary to issue a show cause notice.
10.6 The order of blacklisting can be passed by the 
registration officer of the concerned category or the officer 
under who’s supervision/under whose supervision the 
registration officer is working.
10.7 Against the penalty imposed, the contractor may 
file an appeal before the departmental secretary within 
thirty days.
10.8	After approval by the government, the blacklisting 
order will be issued by the concerned registration officer.”
15.	 Before we proceed to consider the Rules relating to blacklisting and 
its adverse consequences, we may state that it was made clear to 
Mr. M.S. Ganesh, learned senior counsel for the appellant, that in 
view of the clear findings of negligence as articulated in the order 
of termination, we will not interfere with the decision of termination. 
As regards the submission of Mr. M.S. Ganesh that the appellant 
did not have sufficient opportunity to defend himself, notwithstanding 
the submission of Mr. Kumar Anurag Singh that termination does 
not require prior notice, we are of the opinion that the appellant had 
sufficient opportunity at the common hearing for termination and 
blacklisting. Further, the appellant argued the entire case before the 
Appellate Authority. Appellant also raised and contested the case 
on merits before the Division Bench. Having examined the contest 
and its due consideration all through, we are of the opinion that the 
decision as regards termination is unimpeachable, on merits as well 
as on the grounds of due process. 
16.	 In so far as the order relating to blacklisting is concerned, we are 
of the opinion that this issue requires close scrutiny and that will be 
undertaken by reference to Rule 10 of the 2012 Rules. 
17.	 A cursory reading of Rule 10 makes it evident that an order of 
blacklisting has serious consequences, effecting not only the existing 
contracts but also bars future business transactions for some years. 
Under Rule 10.3, if a registered contractor is blacklisted for any one 
category as per Rule 10.1, then the registration of the said contractor 
in all other categories, if any, will be deemed to be cancelled with 
immediate effect. Upon such cancellation, under Rule 10.4, all the 

344
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
works carried out by the blacklisted contractor in the department will 
be stopped from the date of issuance of order under Rule 10.1. It also 
provides that the security deposit for all the works will be forfeited. 
18.	 The contractual conditions governing termination on the one hand 
and those that relate to blacklisting on the other are distinct and will 
be exercised independently. A decision of blacklisting is not automatic 
and certainly not a logical consequence of a decision of termination. 
Even after the Department decides to terminate the contract, there is 
still a choice of exercising the power of blacklisting. These decisions 
operate in two dimensions - past and subsisting for termination 
and future for blacklisting. In other words, an order of blacklisting 
transcends the existing contract and debars the contractor from 
contracts that could probably be executed in the next five years. In 
view of the serious consequences, it is necessary for the Department 
to issue a specific notice proposing blacklisting of a contractor and 
call for an explanation as to why an order of blacklisting should not 
be passed. This is exactly the purpose and object behind Rule 10.5. 
19.	 The requirement under Clause 10.5 is a clear case of legislative (in 
this case subordinate legislation) incorporation of principles of natural 
justice. This Court has time and again emphasised the need to adhere 
to principles of natural justice while passing blacklisting orders, 
given the grave consequences that follow. In Erusian Equipment & 
Chemicals Ltd. v. State of West Bengal1, it was observed that – 
“15.  The blacklisting order does not pertain to any 
particular contract. The blacklisting order involves civil 
consequences. It casts a slur. It creates a barrier between 
the persons blacklisted and the Government in the matter 
of transactions. The blacklists are “instruments of 
coercion”.
20.  Blacklisting has the effect of preventing a person 
from the privilege and advantage of entering into lawful 
relationship with the Government for purposes of gains. 
The fact that a disability is created by the order of 
blacklisting indicates that the relevant authority is 
1	
(1975) 1 SCC 70. The principle in Eurasian Equipment has been reiterated by this Court in many 
subsequent judgements such as Raghunath Thakur v. State of Bihar (1989) 1 SCC 229, Gorkha Security 
Services v. Govt. (NCT of Delhi), (2014) 9 SCC 105, etc. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
345
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
to have an objective satisfaction. Fundamentals of fair 
play require that the person concerned should be given 
an opportunity to represent his case before he is put on 
the blacklist.”
20.	 In order to emphasise the requirement of a show cause notice 
preceding an order of blacklisting, this Court in UMC Technologies 
Pvt Ltd v. Food Corporation of India2 held that – 
“13.  At the outset, it must be noted that it is the first 
principle of civilised jurisprudence that a person against 
whom any action is sought to be taken or whose right or 
interests are being affected should be given a reasonable 
opportunity to defend himself. The basic principle of 
natural justice is that before adjudication starts, 
the authority concerned should give to the affected 
party a notice of the case against him so that he can 
defend himself. Such notice should be adequate and 
the grounds necessitating action and the penalty/
action proposed should be mentioned specifically and 
unambiguously. An order travelling beyond the bounds 
of notice is impermissible and without jurisdiction to that 
extent. This Court in Nasir Ahmad v. Custodian General, 
Evacuee Property3 has held that it is essential for the notice 
to specify the particular grounds on the basis of which an 
action is proposed to be taken so as to enable the noticee 
to answer the case against him. If these conditions are not 
satisfied, the person cannot be said to have been granted 
any reasonable opportunity of being heard.
14.  Specifically, in the context of blacklisting of a 
person or an entity by the State or a State Corporation, 
the requirement of a valid, particularised and 
unambiguous show-cause notice is particularly crucial 
due to the severe consequences of blacklisting and 
the stigmatisation that accrues to the person/entity 
being blacklisted. Here, it may be gainful to describe 
the concept of blacklisting and the graveness of the 
2	
(2021) 2 SCC 551.
3	
Nasir Ahmad v. Custodian General, Evacuee Property, (1980) 3 SCC 1.

346
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
consequences occasioned by it. Blacklisting has the 
effect of denying a person or an entity the privileged 
opportunity of entering into government contracts. 
This privilege arises because it is the State who is the 
counterparty in government contracts and as such, every 
eligible person is to be afforded an equal opportunity 
to participate in such contracts, without arbitrariness 
and discrimination. Not only does blacklisting take 
away this privilege, it also tarnishes the blacklisted 
person’s reputation and brings the person’s character 
into question. Blacklisting also has long-lasting civil 
consequences for the future business prospects of 
the blacklisted person.
21. Thus, from the above discussion, a clear legal position 
emerges that for a show-cause notice to constitute the 
valid basis of a blacklisting order, such notice must 
spell out clearly, or its contents be such that it can 
be clearly inferred therefrom, that there is intention 
on the part of the issuer of the notice to blacklist the 
noticee. Such a clear notice is essential for ensuring 
that the person against whom the penalty of blacklisting 
is intended to be imposed, has an adequate, informed 
and meaningful opportunity to show cause against his 
possible blacklisting.”
21.	 The judgment in M/S Techno Prints v. Chhattisgarh Textbook 
Corporation & Anr.4 underscored the need for a detailed consideration 
of the consequences of blacklisting right at the outset, that is, 
from the stage of issuing of show cause notice. The Court held as 
follows –
“29. However, what is important for us to say is that 
when there are guiding principles explained by 
this Court as to when & in what circumstances a 
blacklisting order can be passed then, in our opinion 
such principles should also be borne in mind by the 
Authority at the time of issuing a show cause notice. 
We say so because in the facts of a given case like the 
4	
2025 INSC 236.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
347
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
one on hand, on the face of which it could be said that 
there was no good reason for the Authority to issue a show 
cause notice calling upon the contractor why he should 
not be blacklisted. Why ask the contractor to face the 
proceedings when applying the aforesaid principles, the 
issue of show cause notice would be an empty formality. 
We are saying all this keeping in mind the peculiar facts 
of this case.
30. Therefore, the Authority is expected to be very careful 
before issuing a show cause notice. It is expected to 
understand the facts well and try to ascertain what sort of 
violation is said to have been committed by the contractor. 
As noted above, there is always an inherent power in 
the Authority to blacklist a contractor. But possessing 
such inherent power and exercising such power are 
two different situations and connotations. There may 
be a power but there should be reasonable ground to 
exercise such power. 
31. To put it by way of an illustration, the Police has the 
power to arrest but it is not necessary that in all cases 
arrest must be effected. The Police should know whether 
at all arrest is necessary. 
32. We may put it in a slightly different way. Take for 
instance, the show cause notice in the present case 
is the final order of blacklisting. The final order in any 
case cannot travel beyond the show cause notice. 
Therefore, we take the show cause notice as the final 
order. Whether it makes out a case for blacklisting? 
This should be the test to determine whether it is a 
genuine case to blacklist a contractor or visit him 
with any other penalty like forfeiture of EMD, recovery 
of damages etc. We say so because once an order 
of blacklisting is passed the same would put an 
end to the business of the person concerned. It is 
a drastic step. Once the final order blacklisting the 
Contractor is passed then the Contractor is left with 
no other option but to go to the High Court invoking 
writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution 

348
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and challenge the same. If he succeeds before the 
Single Judge then it is well and good otherwise he 
may have to prefer a writ appeal or LPA as the case 
may be. This again would lead to unnecessary litigation 
in the High Courts. The endeavour should be to curtail 
the litigation and not to overburden the High Courts with 
litigations of the present type more particularly when 
the law by and large is very well settled and there is no 
further scope of any debate.”
22.	 Returning to the facts of the present case, at the outset, it is 
apparent that the show cause notice dated 04.06.2024 does not 
purport to be a show cause notice for blacklisting at all. It perhaps 
expects the contractor to assume that it is for termination as 
well as for blacklisting. Even if we accept the submissions of Mr. 
Kumar Anurag Singh that, as there is no provision for prior notice 
before termination, this show cause notice must be taken to be 
for blacklisting, we are of the opinion that it still falls short of the 
requirement of a proper show cause notice for blacklisting. This is 
for the reason that as the decision to blacklist is independent of the 
decision to terminate, the Department must demonstrate application 
of mind before it takes the next step of blacklisting the contractor, 
over an order of termination. Upon taking such a decision, it must 
also issue a show cause notice calling upon the contractor to explain 
why a consequential order of blacklisting should also not be passed. 
The letter must be indicative of the proposed decision to blacklist 
and the requirement of the contractor to respond to it. The show 
cause notice dated 04.06.2024 falls short of these requirements. 
Similarly, the final order of blacklisting, dated 23.08.2024, also 
does not list the reasons as to why an order of blacklisting has 
become necessary. 
23.	 The contractual relationship between the parties is governed by two 
legal regimes. While GCC governs termination, the 2012 Rules govern 
blacklisting. Proceedings for termination should not be conflated with 
proceedings for blacklisting. In the latter action, what is at stake is 
the future of the contractor. A blacklisting order assumes that the 
contractor is an incorrigible entity, at least for some time to come, in 
this case such an assumption was intended to operate for five years. 
For giving effect to such a premise, there has to be sufficient evidence, 
clear application of mind and stronger adherence to principles of 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
349
M/s A.K.G. Construction and Developers Pvt. Ltd v.  
State of Jharkhand & Ors.
natural justice5. The blacklisting order dated 23.08.2004 falls short 
of this requirement and is liable to be set aside. 
24.	 As a consequence of our decision to set aside the blacklisting order, 
we would have required the Department to issue a fresh show 
cause notice indicative of the reasons as to why a blacklisting order 
is felt necessary and to thereby call upon the contractor to show 
cause. However, in view of the fact that the order of termination cum 
blacklisting was passed on 23.08.2024, and since then almost more 
than one and a half year has already passed, without there being 
a stay of the said order in the meantime, we are of the opinion that 
the relief to be granted can suitably be moulded by directing that 
the order of blacklisting will cease to operate with immediate effect. 
This order will benefit the appellant more than the Department, 
because directing issuance of a fresh show cause notice will only 
lead to further litigation.
25.	 Having considered the matter in detail and taking into account the 
unimpeachable material about the negligence of the appellant leading 
to collapse of the top dome of the ESR, we are of the opinion that the 
order of termination of all contracts is legal and valid. Civil Appeals 
to this extent are dismissed. However, the decision of blacklisting of 
the appellant is illegal, arbitrary and unreasonable. The declaration of 
blacklisting is set aside, and shall cease to operate with immediate 
effect.
Result of the case: Appeals disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
5	
Kulja Industries Ltd. v. Chief General Manager, Western Telecom Project BSNL, (2014) 14 SCC 731; The 
Blue Dreamz Advertising Pvt Ltd. & Anr. v. Kolkata Municipal Corporation & Ors, 2024 INSC 589, M/s 
Techno Prints (supra). 
