[2026] 4 S.C.R. 508 : 2026 INSC 348
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased 
Represented by Legal Heirs 
v.
M/s Mahendra Watch Company 
Represented by its Partners & Ors. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4353 of 2026)
10 April 2026
[Ahsanuddin Amanullah and R. Mahadevan,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the High Court was justified in interfering with the findings 
of fact recorded by the trial Court while exercising its revisional 
jurisdiction u/s.46 of the Karnataka Rent Act, 1999; whether the 
burden of proving unlawful sub-letting lies upon the landlord, and if 
so, whether such burden was duly discharged in the present case; 
whether the alleged retirement of the original tenant-partner and 
continuation of business by Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 constituted 
a mere reconstitution of partnership or amounts to unlawful 
sub-letting / assignment u/ss.27(2)(b)(ii) and 27(2)(p) of the 
Karnataka Rent Act, 1999.
Headnotes†
Karnataka Rent Act, 1999 – s.46 – Revisional jurisdiction 
under – Exercise of – When not sustainable – Respondent 
No.1-Company, a partnership firm was a tenant under the 
appellant’s predecessor-landlord (since deceased) – However, 
Respondent No.1 had unlawfully sublet the premises and 
parted with possession in favour of third parties (Respondent 
Nos.2 and 3) who were not parties to the lease agreement, 
without the consent of the landlord – Eviction petition allowed 
by trial Court inter alia holding that that Respondent Nos.2 
and 3 in actual occupation of the premises were strangers to 
the original tenancy and the tenant had unlawfully parted with 
possession in their favour – High Court allowed the revision 
petition filed by respondents – Whether the High Court was 
justified in interfering with the findings of fact recorded by the 
trial Court while exercising its revisional jurisdiction u/s.46:
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
509
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
Held: No – Findings recorded by the trial Court were pure 
findings of fact based on proper appreciation of evidence – No 
perversity, illegality, or jurisdictional error was demonstrated – 
High Court transgressed the limits of its revisional jurisdiction by 
reassessing the evidence and substituting its own conclusions – 
Therefore, impugned interference u/s.46 is unsustainable in law 
as it effectively converted revisional jurisdiction into appellate 
jurisdiction – Impugned order set aside – Order of the trial Court 
directing eviction of the respondents, restored. [Paras 12.8, 12.9]
Karnataka Rent Act, 1999 – Respondent No.1-Company, 
a partnership firm was a tenant under the appellant’s 
predecessor-landlord (since deceased) through its partner-
Respondent No.4 – However, Respondent No.1 unlawfully 
sublet the premises and parted with possession in favour of 
third parties (Respondent Nos.2 and 3) who were not parties 
to the lease agreement, without the consent of the landlord – 
Landlord filed eviction petition, allowed by trial Court – High 
Court allowed the revision petition filed by respondents – 
Whether the burden of proving unlawful sub-letting lies 
upon the landlord, and if so, whether such burden was duly 
discharged in the present case:
Held: The lease deed recognized only Respondent No.4 as the 
tenant – Respondent Nos.2 and 3 were not parties to the lease 
and therefore, cannot claim any independent tenancy rights – The 
burden of proving unlawful subletting initially lay upon the landlord, 
which was duly discharged by establishing exclusive possession 
of third parties and absence of the original tenant – The burden 
thereafter shifted to the respondents, who failed to rebut the 
presumption by adducing cogent evidence – Consequently, unlawful 
sub-letting stands proved. [Paras 13.6, 13.8]
Karnataka Rent Act, 1999 – ss.27(2)(b)(ii) and 27(2)(p) – Sub-
letting through the device of partnership – Respondents’ case 
rested on an alleged reconstitution of the partnership firm – 
Whether the alleged retirement of the original tenant-partner 
and continuation of business by Respondent Nos.2 and 3 
constituted a mere reconstitution of partnership or amounts to 
unlawful sub-letting / assignment u/ss.27(2)(b)(ii) and 27(2)(p):
Held: Sub-letting requires parting with legal possession, i.e., transfer 
of the right to exclusive possession – Mere induction or retirement 

510
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of partners does not amount to sub-letting so long as the tenant 
retains control and legal possession – Courts are entitled to lift 
the veil of partnership where it is used as a device to conceal an 
impermissible transfer – Once exclusive possession of a third party 
is established, the burden shifts to the tenant to prove that the 
arrangement is bona fide – Thus, the determinative test is whether 
the original tenant continues to retain legal possession and control 
over the premises – Original tenant ceased to have any role in 
the business or the premises and Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 are in 
exclusive possession and control – Once such exclusive possession 
by third parties is established, the burden shifts to the respondents 
to prove that the arrangement is a genuine partnership and not a 
device to conceal sub-letting – Respondents failed to discharge 
this burden by producing any cogent or reliable evidence – They 
failed to produce the original partnership deed, any duly proved 
retirement deed, or any document evidencing continuity of the 
original tenant firm – No material to show that Respondent Nos.2 
and 3 were partners in the original tenant firm – Their induction 
into possession is, therefore not traceable to the original tenancy 
– Original tenant divested himself of legal possession, and 
Respondent Nos.2 and 3, who are strangers to the tenancy, are 
in exclusive occupation of the premises without the consent of 
the landlord – The so-called reconstitution is nothing but a cloak 
to conceal an unlawful transfer of possession, warranting lifting 
of the veil – The arrangement cannot be regarded as a bona fide 
reconstitution of partnership and amounts to unlawful sub-letting 
/ assignment within the meaning of s.27(2)(b)(ii) – Further, the 
continued occupation by Respondent Nos.2 and 3 without any 
lawful right, attracts s.27(2)(p) also – Therefore, respondents are 
liable to eviction – Impugned order set aside – Order of the trial 
Court directing eviction of the respondents, restored. [Paras 14.3, 
14.6, 14.7, 14.9, 14.10, 15]
Tenancy – Eviction proceedings on ground of sub-letting – 
Burden of proof:
Held: Burden of proof lies upon the party asserting a fact – In 
eviction proceedings founded on the ground of sub-letting, the 
initial onus rests upon the landlord to establish that the tenant 
has parted with possession of the tenanted premises in favour of 
a third party without authority – The landlord discharges the initial 
burden by establishing (i) exclusive possession of a third party, 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
511
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
and (ii) absence of the original tenant from possession – Upon 
such proof, a presumption of sub-letting arises, and the onus 
shifts to the tenant to demonstrate that such possession is lawful 
and not in the nature of sub-tenancy – It is established that the 
original tenant was no longer in possession, and Respondent 
Nos.2 and 3 were in exclusive occupation of the premises – Thus, 
the landlord successfully proved exclusive possession of third 
parties thereby discharging the initial burden and giving rise to a 
presumption of unlawful sub-letting – The burden, therefore, shifted 
upon the respondents to rebut the said presumption – However, 
the respondents failed to discharge this burden – No cogent or 
reliable evidence was adduced to establish the existence of a valid 
partnership, reconstitution deed, lawful induction, or consent of the 
landlord to such arrangement – In the absence of such evidence, 
the possession of Respondent Nos.2 and 3 remains unexplained 
and unlawful. [Paras 13.1, 13.5-13.7]
Karnataka Rent Act, 1999 – s.46 – Revisional jurisdiction 
under – Scope:
Held: Is narrowly circumscribed – It empowers the High Court to 
examine the legality, correctness or propriety of an order however, 
it does not confer appellate powers permitting re-appreciation of 
evidence or substitution of factual findings. [Paras 12.1-12.3]
Karnataka Rent Act, 1999 – ss.46, 26 – High Court allowed the 
revision petition preferred by Respondents and set aside the 
eviction order – Respondents had inter alia placed reliance 
upon rent receipts:
Held: High Court while exercising jurisdiction u/s.46, undertook 
a fresh analysis of the evidence, including depositions of PW-1 
and RW-1, partnership documents, and rent receipts, and arrived 
at independent factual conclusions – Such an exercise clearly 
amounts to reappreciation of evidence, which is impermissible 
in revisional jurisdiction – The statutory scheme provides for an 
appeal u/s.26 where the legislature has consciously created a 
separate appellate remedy, the revisional jurisdiction cannot be 
expanded so as to substitute or bypass the appellate mechanism – 
Furthermore, mere fact that rent receipts may continue in the 
name of the original tenant does not advance the respondents’ 
case, as it is legal possession and control and not the formality 
of rent payment, which is determinative. [Paras 12.6, 12.7, 14.8]

512
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Law Cited
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited v. Dilbahar Singh [2014] 
14 SCR 1379 : (2014) 9 SCC 78 – followed.
S.R. Radhakrishnan v. Neelamegam [2003] Supp. 1 SCR 987 : 
(2003) 10 SCC 705; Associated Hotels of India Ltd v. S.B. Sardar 
Ranjit Singh [1968] SCR 548 : AIR 1968 SC 933; Jagan Nath (D) 
through LRs v. Chander Bhan and Another [1988] Supp. 1 SCR 
325 : (1988) 3 SCC 57; Mahendra Saree Emporium (II) v. G.V. 
Srinivasa Murthy [2004] Supp. 3 SCR 931 : (2005) 1 SCC 481; 
Rukmini Amma Saradamma v. Kallyani Sulochana and Others 
[1992] Supp. 3 SCR 579 : (1993) 1 SCC 499; Thankamony Amma 
and Others v. Omana Amma N. and Others [2019] 10 SCR 125 : 
(2020) 19 SCC 254; Joginder Singh Sodhi v. Amar Kaur [2004] 
Supp. 5 SCR 303 : (2005) 1 SCC 31; Ram Murti Devi v. Pushpa 
Devi and Others [2017] 7 SCR 872 : (2017) 15 SCC 230; Amar 
Nath Agarwalla v. Dhillon Transport Agency [2007] 3 SCR 442 : 
(2007) 4 SCC 306; Celina Coelho Pereira (Ms) and Others v. 
Ulhas Mahabaleshwar Kholkar and Others [2009] 15 SCR 558 : 
(2010) 1 SCC 217 – referred to. 
List of Acts
Karnataka Rent Act, 1999.
List of Keywords
Revisional jurisdiction under Section 46 of the Karnataka Rent Act, 
1999; Unlawful sub-letting; Unlawful sub-letting stands proved; 
Eviction proceedings on ground of sub-letting; Onus in eviction 
proceedings on ground of sub-letting; Original tenant no longer in 
possession; Exclusive possession of third parties; Initial burden 
discharged; Presumption of unlawful sub-letting; Onus shifted to 
tenant; Sub-letting through partnership; Strangers to tenancy; In 
exclusive occupation of premises without the consent of landlord; 
Induction into possession not traceable to the original tenancy; 
Reconstitution of partnership; Cloak to conceal unlawful transfer 
of possession; Lifting of veil; Lifting of the veil warranted; Original 
tenant divested of legal possession; Not a bona fide reconstitution 
of partnership; Section 27(2)(b)(ii) of the Karnataka Rent Act, 
1999; Section 27(2)(p) of the Karnataka Rent Act, 1999; Revisional 
jurisdiction converted into appellate jurisdiction; Burden of proving 
unlawful sub-letting; Tenant unlawfully parted with possession in 
favour of a third party.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
513
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4353 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 23.05.2023 of the High Court 
of Karnataka at Bengaluru in HRRP No. 56 of 2017.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Devashish Bharuka, Sr. Adv., H.S. Somnath, Ms. Sarvshree, 
Ms. Soumya Sandilaya, Ms. Yashaswi Agrawal.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Paras Jain, T. Harish Kumar, Shubham Kothari, Mrs. Aiyushi Daga, 
Shubham P. Chopra.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
R. Mahadevan, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This Civil Appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 
23.05.2023 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru1 
in House Rent Revision Petition No. 56 of 2017, whereby the High 
Court allowed the revision petition preferred by Respondent Nos. 1 
to 3 and set aside the order dated 14.07.2017 passed by the Chief 
Judge, Court of Small Causes, Bengaluru2 in H.R.C. No. 63 of 2016. 
By the said order, the trial Court had allowed the eviction petition 
and directed the respondents to vacate the schedule premises and 
hand over vacant possession to the appellant (since deceased), 
within a period of three months.
3.	
The appellants are the legal representatives of late Sri M.V. 
Ramachandrasa, who originally initiated the rent control proceedings 
before the trial Court. It is their case that the deceased appellant 
now represented through his legal representatives, was a long-term 
1	
 Hereinafter referred to as “the High Court”
2	
 Hereinafter referred to as “the trial Court”

514
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
lessee in respect of immovable properties bearing Municipal New 
Nos. 22 to 33, situated at Uttaradhi Mutt Lane, Chickpet, Bengaluru. 
The said lease was created by virtue of a registered lease deed 
dated 02.02.1983 for a period of 55 years. Under the terms of the 
lease, the deceased appellant was duly authorised to sub-lease the 
whole or any portion of the property.
4.	
It is the further case of the appellants that Respondent No. 1, M/s.
Mahendra Watch Company, a partnership firm, became a tenant 
under the deceased appellant3 through its partner, Rajesh Kumar, 
Respondent No. 4, in respect of premises viz., Shop No.1, Ground 
Floor, Maruthi Plaza, Block C, U.M. Lane, Chickpet, Bangalure, by 
virtue of a lease deed dated 22.02.1985 registered as Document 
No. 3669 / 1985. Subsequently, the landlord came to be aware 
that Respondent Nos. 1 and 4 were no longer in possession of the 
premises and that the business therein was being carried on by 
Respondent Nos. 2 and 3, namely Ashish M. Jain and Atul M. Jain, 
who were not parties to the said lease agreement. Upon issuance 
of notice in this regard, the landlord instituted H.R.C. No. 63 of 2016 
under Sections 27(b)(ii), 27(d)(i)(ii) and 27(p) of the Karnataka Rent 
Act, 1999, seeking eviction on the ground that Respondent No. 1 
had unlawfully sublet the premises and parted with possession in 
favour of third parties without the consent of the landlord. 
5.	
The trial Court, upon consideration of the pleadings and the oral as 
well as documentary evidence on record, concluded that the persons 
in actual occupation of the premises were strangers to the original 
tenancy and that the tenant had unlawfully parted with possession in 
their favour. Pointing out that the lease deed expressly prohibited sub-
letting or parting with possession without the consent of the landlord, 
the trial Court held that the respondents had rendered themselves 
liable for eviction. Accordingly, by order dated 14.07.2017, the eviction 
petition was allowed and the respondents were directed to vacate 
the premises and hand over vacant possession to the landlord. 
6.	
Aggrieved thereby, the respondents preferred House Rent Revision 
Petition No. 56 of 2017 under Section 46 of the Karnataka Rent Act, 
1999 against the appellants herein, who are the legal representatives 
of the deceased appellant / landlord. The High Court, by its impugned 
3	
 Hereinafter referred to “the landlord” 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
515
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
judgment dated 23.05.2023, allowed the revision petition and set 
aside the eviction order passed by the trial Court. It is in these 
circumstances that the appellants have approached this Court by 
way of the present appeal. 
7.	
The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants submitted 
that the High Court has clearly transgressed the well-settled limits 
of its revisional jurisdiction under Section 46 of the Karnataka Rent 
Act, 1999. The revisional power is supervisory in nature and does 
not confer upon the High Court the status of a court of first appeal. 
It was submitted that the High Court, instead of confining itself to 
examining jurisdictional error, illegality, or perversity, has proceeded 
to reappreciate the entire oral and documentary evidence and 
substituted its own findings in place of those recorded by the trial 
Court. Such an exercise is wholly impermissible in law.
7.1.	 Reliance was placed on the judgment of this Court in Hindustan 
Petroleum Corporation Limited v. Dilbahar Singh4, wherein, 
it was categorically held that revisional jurisdiction under rent 
control statutes is limited and cannot be equated with appellate 
jurisdiction. Interference is warranted only where findings are 
perverse, based on no evidence, or suffer from manifest illegality.
7.2.	 It was submitted that the trial Court, upon a comprehensive 
appreciation of the evidence on record, returned well-reasoned 
findings of fact, and categorically held that Respondent Nos. 2 
and 3 failed to establish their status as partners of the original 
tenant firm namely M/s. Mahendra Watch Company. The 
documentary evidence relied upon by the respondents was found 
unreliable, and significantly, no partnership deed or credible 
material was produced to substantiate the claim that Respondent 
Nos. 2 and 3 were partners of the original tenant firm. These are 
pure findings of fact and could not have been interfered with by 
the High Court in the absence of perversity or patent illegality, 
which is conspicuously absent in the present case.
7.3.	 It was further submitted that Clause 19 of the registered lease 
deed dated 22.02.1985 (Ex. P4) expressly prohibits sub-letting 
or transfer of the tenancy rights, including sale of the business, 
4	
(2014) 9 SCC 78

516
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
without prior written consent of the landlord. The respondents 
have failed to produce any document evidencing such consent. 
The material on record clearly establishes that persons presently 
in occupation, namely Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 have no lawful 
nexus with the original tenancy. Their claim of deriving rights 
through an alleged partnership is unsupported by any legally 
admissible document.
7.4.	 It was submitted that the respondents’ case rests on an alleged 
reconstitution of the partnership firm. However, the so-called 
reconstitution deed is unregistered and legally untenable; no 
original partnership deed was produced; there is no documentary 
evidence to establish that Mohanlal, claimed to be the father of 
Respondent Nos. 2 and 3, was ever a partner; RW-1 (Mohanlal) 
himself admitted that at the time of execution of the lease deed 
in 1985, there were five partners, yet, only Respondent No. 4 
signed the lease deed. As such, the trial Court rightly concluded 
that the respondents failed to prove any valid induction into the 
partnership with the consent of the landlord.
7.5.	 It was further submitted that the reliance placed by the 
respondents on Ex. R2 series (rent receipts) is wholly misplaced. 
The said receipts stand in the name of the original tenant firm 
and do not confer any independent right upon Respondent Nos. 
2 and 3. In this regard, reference was made to the decision 
in S.R. Radhakrishnan v. Neelamegam5, wherein, this Court 
held that mere payment of rent or continuance in possession 
does not ipso facto confer the status of a tenant.
7.6.	 It was submitted that the appellants have clearly established 
grounds for eviction under Sections 27(2)(b)(ii) and 27(2)(p) 
of the Karnataka Rent Act, 1999 inasmuch as there has been 
unauthorised sub-letting / transfer of possession; the terms of 
the lease deed have been violated; and the respondents are in 
unlawful occupation without any legal right or privity of contract.
7.7.	 It was submitted that the High Court, without adverting to 
the above material aspects and settled principles of law, has 
erroneously reversed the well-reasoned judgment of the trial 
5	
(2003) 10 SCC 705

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
517
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
Court and set aside the eviction order. Therefore, the impugned 
judgment suffers from serious legal infirmity and warrants 
interference by this court. 
8.	
Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents at 
the out, submitted that the present appeal is liable to be dismissed 
in limine as the appellants have not approached this Court with 
clean hands and have in fact, suppressed material particulars in the 
list of dates and events. It was contended that the appellants have 
failed to place true and correct facts and therefore are not entitled 
to any relief much less the discretionary relief under Article 136 of 
the Constitution of India. 
8.1.	 The learned counsel further submitted that the respondent firm, 
represented by its partners, has been a lawful tenant in respect 
of the suit shop since the year 1978, having acquired tenancy 
rights upon payment of goodwill to the original owner, namely 
Shrimad Jagadguru Madhav Acharya Moola Mahasamsthane, 
Uttaradhi Math, Bengaluru. It was submitted that subsequently, 
the landlord obtained a long-term lease of the larger property 
under a registered lease deed dated 02.02.1983 for a period of 
55 years, taking symbolic possession of tenanted portions and 
physical possession of vacant portions. Upon such acquisition, 
he proposed redevelopment of the property and assured all 
existing tenants, including the respondent firm, that they would 
be accommodated in the newly constructed complex, while also 
offering temporary alternate accommodation.
8.2.	 It was submitted that acting upon such assurance, the tenants 
vacated the old premises, following which the landlord 
demolished the existing structure and constructed a new 
shopping complex. Upon completion, the respondent firm 
was allotted a shop measuring 95 sq.ft. in place of the earlier 
164 sq.ft. and a registered lease deed dated 22.02.1985 was 
executed for a period of 53 years, expiring on 22.02.2038. The 
agreed rent was fixed at Rs. 275/- per month with a provision 
for periodic enhancement. Since then, the respondent firm 
has been in continuous possession and has been carrying on 
business in the said premises without interruption. 
8.3.	 The learned counsel emphasised that the lease deed confers 
valuable and enduring rights upon the respondent firm, including 

518
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
heritability, transferability among partners and their heirs, 
and liberty to carry on business in partnership. It was further 
submitted that the lease deed does not contain any forfeiture 
clause attracting Section 111(g) of the Transfer of Property 
Act, 1882, and therefore, the tenancy cannot be prematurely 
terminated. It was contended that the respondent firm is entitled 
to peaceful possession and enjoyment of the premises for the 
entire duration of the lease, and the eviction proceedings initiated 
during the subsistence of such lease are wholly misconceived 
and not maintainable in law.
8.4.	 The learned counsel further submitted that the allegation of 
subletting, which forms the foundation of the eviction petition, 
is entirely baseless. It was contended that the respondent firm 
has at no point sublet, assigned, or parted with possession of 
the premises. The business has continuously been carried on 
by the partners of the firm, and any change in the constitution of 
the partnership does not amount to subletting. It was submitted 
that a partnership firm is not a separate legal entity distinct 
from its partners, and the firm name is merely a compendious 
description of the partners who carry on the business.
8.5.	 Reliance was placed on the judgments of this Court in 
Associated Hotels of India Ltd v. S.B. Sardar Ranjit Singh6, 
Jagan Nath (D) through LRs v. Chander Bhan and another7, 
and Mahendra Saree Emporium (II) v. G.V. Srinivasa Murthy8, 
wherein it was held that subletting necessarily requires parting 
with legal possession in favour of a third party and the mere use 
of premises by others, including partners, does not constitute 
subletting so long as the tenant retains legal possession. It 
was submitted that in the present case, there is no evidence 
whatsoever to show that any third party has been put in exclusive 
possession of the premises.
8.6.	 The learned counsel further contended that the burden of proving 
subletting squarely lies upon the landlord, which burden has 
not been discharged in the present case. In the absence of any 
6	
AIR 1968 SC 933
7	
(1988) 3 SCC 57
8	
(2005) 1 SCC 481

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
519
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
material to establish exclusive possession by a third party for 
consideration, no presumption of subletting can arise. It was 
submitted that the High Court rightly appreciated the evidence 
on record and applied the settled principles of law in setting 
aside the eviction order.
8.7.	 It was also submitted that the partnership firm was reconstituted 
on 01.07.2000, prior to the coming into force of the Karnataka 
Rent Act, 1999, and that the continuing partners, including 
Ashish M. Jain, have been carrying on business in the suit 
premises before 31.12.2001. The appellants were fully aware 
of the same, as rent was being regularly collected from the 
respondent firm. It was contended that mere reconstitution of 
a partnership firm or induction of partners does not amount to 
assignment or subletting, particularly when the firm continues 
to retain possession and control over the premises. 
8.8.	 The learned counsel submitted that the eviction petition is 
based on a wholly illusory cause of action and has been 
filed by suppressing the existence of the registered lease 
deed dated 22.02.1985. A meaningful reading of the petition 
would demonstrate that the appellants have attempted to 
mischaracterise the partners of the firm as sub-tenants, which is 
impermissible in law. It was thus contended that the proceedings 
are an abuse of the process of court and liable to be dismissed.
9.	
We have carefully considered the rival submissions and perused the 
material available on record. 
10.	 The admitted position is that the appellants are the legal heirs of the 
deceased appellant, Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa, who himself acquired 
leasehold rights in respect of the property bearing Nos. 22 to 33 
under a lease deed dated 02.02.1983 executed by Uttaradi Math 
represented by its Presiding Swamiji through its power of attorney, 
for a period of 55 years with liberty to sub-let the properties. It is 
not in dispute that after obtaining the said lease, the landlord leased 
the premises to Respondent No. 1 represented by Respondent 
No. 4, under a registered lease deed dated 22.02.1985 (Document 
No. 3669/1985) for a period of 53 years. Clause 19 of the lease 
deed expressly restricts subletting without prior written consent of 
the landlord. Since the actual and original partner of Respondent 
No. 1 firm was not in occupation and possession of the premises, 

520
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the landlord preferred eviction petition before the trial Court. After 
examining the oral and documentary evidence, the trial Court allowed 
the petition and directed the respondents to vacate and hand over 
the possession of the premises within a period of three months. 
However, the High Court allowed the revision petition and set aside 
the eviction order. Therefore, the present appeal at the instance of 
the appellants, who are the legal representatives of the deceased 
appellant / landlord. 
11.	 On the basis of the pleadings, the following issues arise for 
consideration in the present appeal:
(i)	
Whether the High Court was justified in interfering with the 
findings of fact recorded by the trial Court while exercising its 
revisional jurisdiction under Section 46 of the Karnataka Rent 
Act, 1999?
(ii)	
Whether the burden of proving unlawful sub-letting lies upon 
the landlord, and if so, whether such burden has been duly 
discharged in the present case?
(iii)	 Whether the alleged retirement of the original tenant – partner 
and continuation of business by Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 
constitutes a mere reconstitution of partnership or amounts to 
unlawful sub-letting / assignment under Sections 27(2)(b)(ii) 
and 27(2)(p) of the Karnataka Rent Act, 1999?
Issue No. 1
12.	 Whether the High Court was justified in interfering with the 
findings of fact recorded by the trial Court while exercising its 
revisional jurisdiction under Section 46 of the Karnataka Rent 
Act, 1999?
12.1.	 At the outset, it must be noted that the scope of revisional 
jurisdiction under Section 46 is well-settled and narrowly 
circumscribed. The provision empowers the High Court to 
examine the legality, correctness or propriety of an order; 
however, it does not confer appellate powers permitting 
reappreciation of evidence or substitution of factual findings. 
For ease of reference, the said provision reads as under:
“46. Revision.- (1) The High Court may, at any time 
call for and examine any order passed or proceeding 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
521
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
taken by the Court of Small Causes or the Court 
of Civil Judge Senior Division referred to in items 
(i) and (ii) of clause (c) of section 3 for the purpose 
satisfying itself as to the legality or correctness 
of such order or proceeding and may pass such 
order in reference thereto as it thinks fit.
(2) The District Judge may at any time call for and 
examine any order passed or proceeding taken by 
the Court of Civil Judge Junior Division referred to in 
item (iii) of clause (c) of section 3 for the purpose of 
such order or proceeding and may pass such order 
in reference thereto as he thinks fit. 
(3) The costs incidental to all proceedings before 
the High Court or the District Judge shall be in the 
discretion of the High Court or the District Judge as 
the case may be.
12.2.	 In Rukmini Amma Saradamma v. Kallyani Sulochana and 
others9, this Court held that even where the statutory language 
appears wide, the revisional court cannot act as a court of 
appeal and undertake a fresh evaluation of evidence. It was 
categorically observed that the High Court cannot reappreciate 
oral and documentary evidence under the guise of examining 
“propriety” as doing so would obliterate the distinction between 
appellate and revisional jurisdiction. The following paragraphs 
are pertinent:
“9. Notwithstanding the fact that Section 20 of the 
Act conferring revisional jurisdiction of the High 
Court is widely worded, such a jurisdiction cannot be 
converted into an appellate jurisdiction. This Court 
in Rai Chand Jain v. Chandra Kanta Khosla10 has 
clearly pointed out the scope of such revisional 
jurisdiction and has held that it cannot act as a 
second court of appeal. Therefore, the impugned 
order is liable to be set aside. Without prejudice to 
9	
(1993) 1 SCC 499
10	
(1991) 1 SCC 422

522
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the above, it is submitted that this Court in Aundal 
Ammal v. Sadasivan Pillai11 has held that no second 
revision is permissible to the High Court either under 
Section 115 of the Code or under Section 20 of the 
Act. The District Court has exercised the revisional 
jurisdiction. Hence, the remit order in C.R.P. No. 
1719 of 1985 is void and is illegal. If that remit order 
goes, what remains is only the revisional order of the 
District Court, Kollam, confirming the appellate order 
directing revision on the ground of bona fide need. 
Hence, the impugned order calls for interference.”
“20. We are afraid this approach of the High Court 
is wrong. Even the wider language of Section 20 
of the Act cannot enable the High Court to act 
as a first or a second court of appeal. Otherwise, 
the distinction between appellate and revisional 
jurisdiction will get obliterated. Hence, the High 
Court was not right in re-appreciating the entire 
evidence both oral or documentary in the light 
of the Commissioner’s report (Exts. C-1 and C-2 
mahazar). In our considered view, the High Court 
had travelled far beyond the revisional jurisdiction. 
Even by the presence of the word “propriety” it 
cannot mean that there could be a re-appreciation of 
evidence. Of course, the revisional court can come 
to a different conclusion but not on a re-appreciation 
of evidence; on the contrary, by confining itself to 
legality, regularity and propriety of the order impugned 
before it. Therefore, we are unable to agree with the 
reasoning of the High Court with reference to the 
exercise of revisional jurisdiction.”
12.3.	 The legal position stands conclusively settled by the Constitution 
Bench of this Court in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd 
(supra), wherein it was held that revisional jurisdiction, though 
wider than that under Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code, 
1908, remains qualitatively distinct from appellate jurisdiction. 
11	
(1987) 1 SCC 183 : AIR 1987 SC 203

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
523
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
The High Court cannot reassess or reanalyse evidence to 
arrive at a different conclusion merely because another view 
is possible. Interference with findings of fact is permissible 
only when such findings are perverse, based on no evidence, 
suffer from misreading of evidence, or result in a miscarriage 
of justice. The following paragraphs are apposite:
“28. Before we consider the matter further to find 
out the scope and extent of revisional jurisdiction 
under the above three Rent Control Acts, a quick 
observation about the “appellate jurisdiction” and 
“revisional jurisdiction” is necessary. Conceptually, 
revisional jurisdiction is a part of appellate 
jurisdiction, but it is not vice versa. Both, appellate 
jurisdiction and revisional jurisdiction are creatures of 
statutes. No party to the proceeding has an inherent 
right of appeal or revision. An appeal is continuation 
of suit or original proceeding, as the case may be. 
The power of the appellate court is coextensive 
with that of the trial court. Ordinarily, appellate 
jurisdiction involves rehearing on facts and law but 
such jurisdiction may be limited by the statute itself 
that provides for the appellate jurisdiction. On the 
other hand, revisional jurisdiction, though, is a part 
of appellate jurisdiction but ordinarily it cannot be 
equated with that of a full-fledged appeal. In other 
words, revision is not continuation of suit or of original 
proceeding. When the aid of Revisional Court is 
invoked on the revisional side, it can interfere within 
the permissible parameters provided in the statute. 
It goes without saying that if a revision is provided 
against an order passed by the Tribunal/appellate 
authority, the decision of the Revisional Court is the 
operative decision in law. In our view, as regards the 
extent of appellate or revisional jurisdiction, much 
would, however, depend on the language employed 
by the statute conferring appellate jurisdiction and 
revisional jurisdiction.”
“31. We are in full agreement with the view expressed 
in Sri Raja Lakshmi Dyeing Works v. Rangaswamy 

524
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Chettiar12 that where both expressions “appeal” 
and “revision” are employed in a statute, 
obviously, the expression “revision” is meant to 
convey the idea of a much narrower jurisdiction 
than that conveyed by the expression “appeal”. 
The use of two expressions “appeal” and 
“revision” when used in one statute conferring 
appellate power and revisional power, we think, is 
not without purpose and significance. Ordinarily, 
appellate jurisdiction involves a rehearing while it 
is not so in the case of revisional jurisdiction when 
the same statute provides the remedy by way of 
an “appeal” and so also of a “revision”. If that were 
so, the revisional power would become coextensive 
with that of the trial court or the subordinate tribunal 
which is never the case. The classic statement in 
Dattonpant Gopalvarao Devakate v. Vithalrao 
Maruthirao Janagaval13 that revisional power under 
the Rent Control Act may not be as narrow as the 
revisional power under Section 115 of the Code but, 
at the same time, it is not wide enough to make the 
High Court a second court of first appeal, commends 
to us and we approve the same. We are of the view 
that in the garb of revisional jurisdiction under the 
above three rent control statutes, the High Court is 
not conferred a status of second court of first appeal 
and the High Court should not enlarge the scope of 
revisional jurisdiction to that extent.”
“33. Rai Chand Jain v. Chandra Kanta Khosla14 
that follows Ram Dass v. Ishwar Chander15, also 
does not lay down that the High Court in exercise 
of its power under the Rent Control Act may 
reverse the findings of fact merely because on 
reappreciation of the evidence it has a different 
12	
(1980) 4 SCC 259
13	
(1975) 2 SCC 246
14	
(1991) 1 SCC 422
15	
(1988) 3 SCC 131

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
525
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
view on the findings of fact. The observations made 
by this Court in Rai Chand Jain must also be read 
in the context we have explained Ram Dass”
“36. The statement in M.S. Zahed v. K. Raghavan16 
that under Section 50 of the Karnataka Rent Control 
Act, the High Court is entitled to reappreciate the 
evidence with a view to find out whether the order 
of Small Cause Court is legal and correct must be 
understood in the light of the observations made 
therein, namely, that revisional power cannot be 
equated with the power of reconsideration of all 
questions of fact as a court of first appeal.”
“43. We hold, as we must, that none of the above Rent 
Control Acts entitles the High Court to interfere with 
the findings of fact recorded by the first appellate court/
first appellate authority because on reappreciation of 
the evidence, its view is different from the court/
authority below. The consideration or examination 
of the evidence by the High Court in revisional 
jurisdiction under these Acts is confined to find 
out that finding of facts recorded by the court/
authority below is according to law and does 
not suffer from any error of law. A finding of fact 
recorded by court/authority below, if perverse or 
has been arrived at without consideration of the 
material evidence or such finding is based on 
no evidence or misreading of the evidence or 
is grossly erroneous that, if allowed to stand, it 
would result in gross miscarriage of justice, is 
open to correction because it is not treated as 
a finding according to law. In that event, the High 
Court in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction under 
the above Rent Control Acts shall be entitled to set 
aside the impugned order as being not legal or proper. 
The High Court is entitled to satisfy itself as to 
the correctness or legality or propriety of any 
16	
(1999) 1 SCC 439

526
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
decision or order impugned before it as indicated 
above. However, to satisfy itself to the regularity, 
correctness, legality or propriety of the impugned 
decision or the order, the High Court shall not 
exercise its power as an appellate power to 
reappreciate or reassess the evidence for coming 
to a different finding on facts. Revisional power 
is not and cannot be equated with the power of 
reconsideration of all questions of fact as a court 
of first appeal. Where the High Court is required to 
be satisfied that the decision is according to law, it 
may examine whether the order impugned before it 
suffers from procedural illegality or irregularity.”
12.4.	 This principle has been consistently reiterated including in 
Thankamony Amma and others v. Omana Amma N. and 
others17, where this Court disapproved reappreciation of 
evidence in exercise of revisional powers.
12.5.	 Applying the aforesaid principles, it is evident that the trial 
Court upon a detailed appreciation of oral and documentary 
evidence, recorded specific findings of fact. These included 
material discrepancies in the respondents’ case inter alia 
inconsistencies regarding the dates relating to purchase 
and stamping of stamp paper, non-production of the original 
partnership deed dated 01.03.2000, absence of proof of 
retirement of the original partner, and lack of written consent 
from the landlord for induction of alleged partners. These 
findings were based on the evidence on record and were 
neither shown to be perverse nor vitiated by any illegality or 
procedural irregularity.
12.6.	 However, the High Court, while exercising jurisdiction under 
Section 46, undertook a fresh analysis of the evidence, 
including depositions of PW-1 (M.R.Goverdhan) and RW-1 
(Mohanlal), partnership documents, and rent receipts, and 
arrived at independent factual conclusions. Such an exercise 
clearly amounts to reappreciation of evidence, which is 
impermissible in revisional jurisdiction.
17	
(2020) 19 SCC 254

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
527
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
12.7.	 It is also significant that the statutory scheme provides for an 
appeal under Section 26 of the Karnataka Rent Act, 1999. Where 
the legislature has consciously created a separate appellate 
remedy, the revisional jurisdiction cannot be expanded so as 
to substitute or bypass the appellate mechanism. 
12.8.	 In view of the above, this Court is of the considered opinion 
that the findings recorded by the trial Court were pure findings 
of fact based on proper appreciation of evidence. No perversity, 
illegality, or jurisdictional error has been demonstrated.
12.9.	 Accordingly, the High Court transgressed the limits of its 
revisional jurisdiction by reassessing the evidence and 
substituting its own conclusions. The impugned interference 
under Section 46 of the Karnataka Rent Act, 1999 is therefore 
unsustainable in law as it effectively converts revisional 
jurisdiction into appellate jurisdiction. 
Issue No. 2
13.	 Whether the burden of proving unlawful sub-letting lies upon 
the landlord, and if so, whether such burden has been duly 
discharged in the present case?
13.1.	 It is a settled principle of law that the burden of proof lies upon 
the party asserting a fact. In eviction proceedings founded on 
the ground of sub-letting, the initial onus rests upon the landlord 
to establish that the tenant has parted with possession of the 
tenanted premises in favour of a third party without authority. 
13.2.	 The jurisprudence on this issue is well crystallized. In 
Associated Hotels of India Ltd v. S.B. Sardar Ranjit Singh 
(supra), this Court held that the landlord must first prove 
parting with possession. However, recognizing the inherently 
clandestine nature of sub-letting arrangements, courts have 
evolved a rule of evidence that once exclusive possession of 
a third party is established, the burden shifts to the tenant to 
explain the nature of such possession. 
13.3.	 This principle has been consistently reaffirmed in Joginder 
Singh Sodhi v. Amar Kaur18, and further authoritatively 
18	
(2005) 1 SCC 31

528
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
expounded by a three Judge Bench in Mahendra Saree 
Emporium (II) v. G.V. Srinivasa Murthy (supra), wherein it 
was held that once a prima facie case of exclusive possession 
by a stranger is made out, a presumption of sub-letting arises, 
thereby shifting the onus onto the tenant. 
13.4.	 In Ram Murti Devi v. Pushpa Devi and others19, after 
considering the earlier precedents, the Court reiterated that 
direct evidence of sub-letting is seldom available, and the same 
can be inferred from surrounding circumstances, particularly 
where exclusive possession of a third party is established. The 
relevant paragraphs are extracted below for better appreciation:
“17.……. This Court held in the above case that 
transaction of sub-letting in their very nature 
are clandestine arrangements between tenant 
and sub-tenant and there cannot be any direct 
evidence and even it is a matter of legitimate 
inference. It was further held that burden of 
proof of establishing fact although lies on the 
landlord but it may shift according to the weight 
of evidence adduced by the party during the trial.
18. In Kala v. Madho Parshad Vaidya20, again the 
Court held that the onus of proof is on the landlord 
and if he establishes the parting of with the possession 
in favour of third party, the onus would shift to the 
tenant to explain. In para 16 following has been 
explained: (SCC p. 577)
“16. … The onus to prove sub-letting is on the landlord 
and if he establishes parting of with the possession 
in favour of a third party, the onus would shift to the 
tenant to explain. In the instant case, however, the 
landlord did not discharge the initial onus and although 
it was not required, yet, the tenant explained how 
Appellant 2 had the permissive possession of the 
shop as its Manager.”
19	
(2017) 15 SCC 230
20	
(1998) 6 SCC 573

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
529
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
19. This Court in Joginder Singh Sodhi v. Amar 
Kaur, had occasion to consider various aspects of 
sub-letting. After noticing the various earlier judgments 
of this Court, this Court reiterated the law in para 13 
to para 17, which are to the following effect: (SCC 
pp. 36-37)
“13. Regarding sub-letting, in our opinion, the 
law is well settled. It is observed in the leading 
case of Associated Hotels of India Ltd. v. S.B. 
Sardar Ranjit Singh that in a suit by the landlord 
for eviction of tenant on the ground of sub-letting, 
the landlord has to prove by leading evidence that 
(i) a third party was found to be in exclusive 
possession of the rented property, and (ii) 
parting of possession thereof was for monetary 
consideration.
14. The above principle was reiterated by this Court 
from time to time. In Shama Prashant Raje v. 
Ganpatrao21, the Court stated that on sub-letting, 
there is no dispute with the proposition that the 
two ingredients, namely, parting with possession 
and monetary consideration therefore have to be 
established.
…..
16. The contention of the learned counsel for the 
appellant, however, is that even if it is assumed that 
one of the ingredients of sub-letting was established, 
the second ingredient, namely, parting of possession 
with “monetary consideration” was not established. 
The counsel urged that there is no evidence on record 
that any amount was paid either in cash or in kind 
by Respondent 2 to Respondent 1. In the absence 
of such evidence sub-tenancy cannot be said to be 
established and the landlady was not entitled to get 
an order of eviction against the tenant.
21	
(2000) 7 SCC 522

530
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
17. We are unable to appreciate the contention. 
As observed by this Court in Bharat Sales Ltd. 
v. LIC22, sub-tenancy or sub-letting comes into 
existence when the tenant gives up possession of the 
tenanted accommodation, wholly or in part, and puts 
another person in exclusive possession thereof. This 
arrangement comes about obviously under a mutual 
agreement or understanding between the tenant and 
the person to whom the possession is so delivered. 
In this process, the landlord is kept out of the 
scene. Rather, the scene is enacted behind the 
back of the landlord, concealing the overt acts 
and transferring possession clandestinely to a 
person who is an utter stranger to the landlord, 
in the sense that the landlord had not let out the 
premises to that person nor had he allowed or 
consented to his entering into possession of that 
person, instead of the tenant, which ultimately 
reveals to the landlord that tenant to whom the 
property was let out has put some other person 
in possession of that property. In such a situation, 
it would be difficult for the landlord to prove, by direct 
evidence, the contract or agreement or understanding 
between the tenant and the sub-tenant. It would 
also be difficult for the landlord to prove, by direct 
evidence, that the person to whom the property had 
been sub-let had paid monetary consideration to the 
tenant. Payment of rent, undoubtedly, is an essential 
element of lease or sub-lease. It may be paid in cash 
or in kind or may have been paid or promised to be 
paid. It may have been paid in lump sum in advance 
covering the period for which the premises is let out 
or sub-let or it may have been paid or promised to be 
paid periodically. Since payment of rent or monetary 
consideration may have been made secretly, the 
law does not require such payment to be proved 
by affirmative evidence and the court is permitted 
to draw its own inference upon the facts of the 
22	
(1998) 3 SCC 1

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
531
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
case proved at the trial, including the delivery of 
exclusive possession to infer that the premises 
were sub-let.”
(emphasis in original)
20. A three-Judge Bench in Mahendra Saree 
Emporium (2) v. G.V. Srinivasa Murthy, had 
occasion to consider the question of sub-letting (sub-
tenancy) and question of burden of proof. In para 16, 
the Court had elaborated the concept of sub-letting 
and laid down the following: (SCC pp. 490-91)
“16. ..........The onus to prove sub-letting is on the 
landlord. If the landlord prima facie shows that 
the occupant, who was in exclusive possession 
of the premises, let out for valuable consideration, 
it would then be for the tenant to rebut the 
evidence.”
Thus, in the case of sub-letting, the onus lying on the 
landlord would stand discharged by adducing prima 
facie proof of the fact that the alleged sub-tenant 
was in exclusive possession of the premises or, to 
borrow the language of Section 105 of the Transfer 
of Property Act, was holding right to enjoy such 
property. A presumption of sub-letting may then be 
raised and would amount to proof unless rebutted.”
21. From the pronouncements of this Court as noticed 
above, following statement of law can be culled out:
21.1. In a suit by the landlord for eviction of the tenant 
on the ground of sub-letting the landlord has to prove 
by leading evidence that:
(a) A third party was found to be in exclusive 
possession of the whole or part of rented property.
(b) Parting of possession thereof was for monetary 
consideration.
21.2. The onus to prove sub-letting is on the landlord 
and if he has established parting of possession in 

532
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
favour of a third party either wholly or partly, the onus 
would shift to the tenant to explain.
21.3. In the event, possession of the tenant wholly 
or partly is proved and the particulars and the 
instances of the transactions are found acceptable, 
in particular facts and circumstances of the case, it is 
not impermissible for the court to draw an inference 
that the transaction was entered with monetary 
consideration. It may not be possible always to give 
direct evidence of monetary consideration since such 
transaction of sub-letting are made between the tenant 
and sub-tenant behind the back of the landlord.
22. In each case, the proof of sub-letting/sub-tenancy 
thus, has to be established on the parameters of 
law, as laid down in the above cases. Whether, in 
particular facts and circumstances the landlord has 
successfully discharged the burden of proving sub-
tenancy depends on pleading and evidence in each 
case.”
13.5.	 Thus, the legal position that emerges is that the landlord 
discharges the initial burden by establishing (i) exclusive 
possession of a third party, and (ii) absence of the original 
tenant from possession. Upon such proof, a presumption 
of sub-letting arises, and the onus shifts to the tenant to 
demonstrate that such possession is lawful and not in the 
nature of sub-tenancy. 
13.6.	 Applying the aforesaid principles, it is evident that the landlord 
has successfully discharged the initial burden. The lease deed 
recognizes only Respondent No. 4 as the tenant. Respondent 
Nos. 2 and 3 are not parties to the lease and therefore, 
cannot claim any independent tenancy rights. The material 
on record clearly establishes that the original tenant is no 
longer in possession, and Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 are in 
exclusive occupation of the premises. This finding has been 
categorically recorded by the trial Court. In such circumstances, 
the landlord has successfully proved exclusive possession of 
third parties thereby discharging the initial burden and giving 
rise to a presumption of unlawful sub-letting. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
533
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
13.7.	 The burden, therefore, shifted upon the respondents to rebut 
the said presumption. However, the respondents have failed 
to discharge this burden. No cogent or reliable evidence has 
been adduced to establish the existence of a valid partnership, 
reconstitution deed, lawful induction, or consent of the landlord 
to such arrangement. In the absence of such evidence, the 
possession of Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 remains unexplained 
and unlawful. As held in Joginder Singh Sodhi, direct proof 
of monetary consideration is not indispensable and may be 
legitimately inferred from the surrounding circumstances, 
particularly where exclusive possession is established without 
lawful explanation.
13.8.	 Accordingly, this Court holds that the burden of proving 
unlawful sub-letting initially lay upon the landlord, which has 
been duly discharged by establishing exclusive possession of 
third parties and absence of the original tenant. The burden 
thereafter shifted to the respondents, who have failed to rebut 
the presumption by adducing cogent evidence. Consequently, 
unlawful sub-letting stands proved.
Issue No. 3
14.	 Whether the alleged retirement of the original tenant – partner 
and continuation of business by Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 
constitutes a mere reconstitution of partnership or amounts 
to unlawful sub-letting / assignment under Sections 27(2)(b)(ii) 
and 27(2)(p) of the Karnataka Rent Act, 1999?
14.1.	 The law governing sub-letting through the device of partnership 
is well-settled and no longer res integra. In Amar Nath 
Agarwalla v. Dhillon Transport Agency23, this Court reiterated 
that a partnership firm is not a separate legal entity but 
merely a compendious name for its partners, and that sub-
letting necessarily involves parting with legal possession. The 
following paragraphs are pertinent:
“8. In Murlidhar v. Chuni Lal24 this Court had repelled 
the contention that the old firm and the new firm being 
23	
(2007) 4 SCC 306
24	
1969 Ren CR 563 : 1970 Ren CJ 922 (SC)

534
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
two different legal entities, the occupation of the shop 
by the new firm was occupation by the legal entity 
other than the original tenant and such occupation 
proved sub-letting. Repelling the contention this 
Court held:
“This contention is entirely without substance. A 
firm, unless expressly provided for the purpose 
of any statute which is not the case here, is not 
a legal entity. The firm name is only a compendious 
way of describing the partners of the firm. Therefore, 
occupation by a firm is only occupation by its 
partners. Here the firms have a common partner. 
Hence the occupation has been by one of the 
original tenants.”
9. In Mohammedkasam Haji Gulambhai v. Bakerali 
Fatehali25 this Court observed: (SCC p. 618, para 13)
“There is absolute prohibition on the tenant 
from sub-letting, assigning or transferring in 
any other manner his interest in the tenanted 
premises. There appears to be no way around 
this subject of course if there is any contract to 
the contrary between the landlord and the tenant. 
In a partnership where the tenant is a partner, 
he retains legal possession of the premises as 
a partnership is a compendium of the names of 
all the partners. In a partnership, the tenant does 
not divest himself of his right in the premises. 
On the question of sub-letting etc. the law is now 
very explicit. There is prohibition in absolute 
terms on the tenant from sub-letting, assignment 
or disposition of his interest in the tenanted 
premises.”
14.2.	 This position has been comprehensively analysed in Celina 
Coelho Pereira (Ms) and others v. Ulhas Mahabaleshwar 
25	
(1998) 7 SCC 608

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
535
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
Kholkar and others26, wherein the Court, after considering 
earlier precedents, distilled the governing principles. The 
following paragraphs are pertinent: 
“17. In Helper Girdharbhai v. Saiyed Mohmad 
Mirasaheb Kadri27 this Court held that in a case 
where a tenant becomes a partner of a partnership 
firm and allows the firm to carry on business in the 
demised premises while he himself retains legal 
possession thereof, the act of the tenant does not 
amount to sub-letting. It was held that whether there 
is genuine partnership or not must be judged in 
the facts of each case in the light of the principles 
applicable to partnership.
18. While dealing with the mischief contemplated 
under Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent Control 
Act, 1958 providing for eviction on the ground of 
sub-letting, this Court in Jagan Nath v. Chander 
Bhan28 held: (SCC p. 61, para 6)
“6. The question for consideration is whether the 
mischief contemplated under Section 14(1)(b) of 
the Act has been committed as the tenant had 
sub-let, assigned, or otherwise parted with the 
possession of the whole or part of the premises 
without obtaining the consent in writing of the 
landlord. There is no dispute that there was 
no consent in writing of the landlord in this 
case. There is also no evidence that there has 
been any sub-letting or assignment. The only 
ground perhaps upon which the landlord was 
seeking eviction was parting with possession. 
It is well settled that parting with possession 
meant giving possession to persons other than 
those to whom possession had been given by 
the lease and the parting with possession must 
26	
(2010) 1 SCC 217
27	
(1987) 3 SCC 538
28	
(1988) 3 SCC 57

536
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
have been by the tenant; user by other person 
is not parting with possession so long as the 
tenant retains the legal possession himself, or in 
other words there must be vesting of possession 
by the tenant in another person by divesting 
himself not only of physical possession but 
also of the right to possession. So long as the 
tenant retains the right to possession there is 
no parting with possession in terms of clause 
(b) of Section 14(1) of the Act. Even though 
the father had retired from the business and 
the sons had been looking after the business, 
in the facts of this case, it cannot be said that 
the father had divested himself of the legal right 
to be in possession. If the father has a right to 
displace the possession of the occupants i.e. 
his sons, it cannot be said that the tenant had 
parted with possession.”
19. The question whether the tenant has assigned, 
sub-let or otherwise parted with the possession 
of the whole or any part of the premises without 
the permission of the landlord within the meaning 
of Section 13(1)(e) of the Rajasthan Premises 
(Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950 fell for 
consideration in Gopal Saran v. Satyanarayana29. 
This Court held: (SCC pp. 69-70, para 16)
“16. … Sub-letting means transfer of an 
exclusive right to enjoy the property in favour 
of the third party. In this connection, reference 
may be made to the decision of this Court in 
Shalimar Tar Products Ltd. v. H.C. Sharma30 
where it was held that to constitute a sub-letting, 
there must be a parting of legal possession 
i.e. possession with the right to include and 
also right to exclude others and whether 
29	
(1989) 3 SCC 56
30	
(1988) 1 SCC 70

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
537
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
in a particular case there was sub-letting 
was substantially a question of fact. In that 
case, a reference was made at SCC p. 77, 
para 16 of the Report to the treatise of Foa on 
Landlord and Tenant, 6th Edn., at p. 323, for 
the proposition that:
‘The mere act of letting other persons into 
possession by the tenant, and permitting 
them to use the premises for their own 
purposes, is not so long as he retains the 
legal possession himself, a breach of the 
covenant.’
In para 17 of the Report, it was observed 
that parting of the legal possession means 
possession with the right to include and also 
right to exclude others. In the last mentioned 
case, the observations of the Madras High 
Court in Gundalapalli Rangamannar Chetty v. 
Desu Rangiah31 were approved by this Court in 
which the legal position in Jackson v. Simons32 
were relied upon. The Madras High Court had 
also relied on a judgment of Scrutton, L.J. 
in Chaplin v. Smith33 at p. 211 of the Report 
where it was said:
‘He did not assign, nor did he under-let. He 
was constantly on the premises himself and 
kept the key of them. He did business of his 
own as well as business of the company. 
In my view he allowed the company to use 
the premises while he himself remained in 
possession of them.’
This position was also accepted in Vishwa 
Nath v. Chaman Lal Khanna34 wherein it 
31	
AIR 1954 Mad 182
32	
(1923) 1 Ch 373 : 1922 All ER Rep 583
33	
(1926) 1 KB 198 (CA)
34	
AIR 1975 Del 117

538
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
was observed that parting with possession is 
understood as parting with legal possession 
by one in favour of the other by giving him 
an exclusive possession to the ouster of 
the grantor. If the grantor had retained legal 
possession with him it was not a case of parting 
with possession.”
The Court also reiterated that to prove sub-tenancy, 
two ingredients have to be established, firstly, the 
tenant must have exclusive right of possession or 
interests in the premises or part of the premises in 
question and secondly, the right must be in lieu of 
payment of some compensation or rent.
20. In G.K. Bhatnagar v. Abdul Alim35 this Court 
held as follows:(SCC p. 518, para 5)
“5. A conjoint reading of these provisions 
shows that on and after 9-6-1952, sub-letting, 
assigning or otherwise parting with the 
possession of the whole or any part of the 
tenancy premises, without obtaining the 
consent in writing of the landlord, is not 
permitted and if done, the same provides 
a ground for eviction of the tenant by the 
landlord. However, inducting a partner in his 
business or profession by the tenant is permitted 
so long as such partnership is genuine. If the 
purpose of such partnership may ostensibly 
be to carry on the business or profession in 
partnership, but the real purpose be sub-letting 
of the premises to such other person who is 
inducted ostensibly as a partner, then the same 
shall be deemed to be an act of sub-letting 
attracting the applicability of clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of Section 14 of the Act.”
35	
(2002) 9 SCC 516

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
539
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
21. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Parvinder 
Singh v. Renu Gautam36 commented upon the 
device adopted by tenants many a time in creating 
partnership as a camouflage to circumvent the 
provisions of the Rent Control Act. The following 
observations are worth noticing: (SCC pp. 799-800, 
paras 8-9)
“8. The rent control legislations which extend 
many a protection to the tenant, also provide 
for grounds of eviction. One such ground, most 
common in all the legislations, is sub-letting 
or parting with possession of the tenancy 
premises by the tenant. Rent control laws 
usually protect the tenant so long as he 
may himself use the premises but not his 
transferee inducted into possession of the 
premises, in breach of the contract or the 
law, which act is often done with the object 
of illegitimate profiteering or rack-renting. 
To defeat the provisions of law, a device is at 
times adopted by unscrupulous tenants and 
sub-tenants of bringing into existence a deed 
of partnership which gives the relationship of 
tenant and sub-tenant an outward appearance 
of partnership while in effect what has come 
into existence is a sub-tenancy or parting with 
possession camouflaged under the cloak of 
partnership. Merely because a tenant has 
entered into a partnership he cannot necessarily 
be held to have sub-let the premises or parted 
with possession thereof in favour of his partners. 
If the tenant is actively associated with the 
partnership business and retains the use 
and control over the tenancy premises with 
him, maybe along with the partners, the 
tenant may not be said to have parted with 
possession. However, if the user and control 
36	
(2004) 4 SCC 794

540
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of the tenancy premises has been parted 
with and deed of partnership has been drawn 
up as an indirect method of collecting the 
consideration for creation of sub-tenancy or 
for providing a cloak or cover to conceal a 
transaction not permitted by law, the court 
is not estopped from tearing the veil of 
partnership and finding out the real nature of 
transaction entered into between the tenant 
and the alleged sub-tenant.
9. A person having secured a lease of premises 
for the purpose of his business may be in need 
of capital or finance or someone to assist him in 
his business and to achieve such like purpose he 
may enter into partnership with strangers. Quite 
often partnership is entered into between the 
members of any family as a part of tax planning. 
There is no stranger brought on the premises. 
So long as the premises remain in occupation 
of the tenant or in his control, a mere entering 
into partnership may not provide a ground for 
eviction by running into conflict with prohibition 
against sub-letting or parting with possession. 
This is a general statement of law which ought 
to be read in the light of the lease agreement 
and the law governing the tenancy. There are 
cases wherein the tenant sub-lets the premises 
or parts with possession in defiance of the terms 
of lease or the rent control legislation and in order 
to save himself from the peril of eviction brings 
into existence, a deed of partnership between 
him and his sub-lessee to act as a cloak on 
the reality of the transaction. The existence of 
deed of partnership between the tenant and 
the alleged sub-tenant would not preclude 
the landlord from bringing on record material 
and circumstances, by adducing evidence or 
by means of cross-examination, making out a 
case of sub-letting or parting with possession 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
541
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
or interest in tenancy premises by the tenant in 
favour of a third person. The rule as to exclusion 
of oral by documentary evidence governs the 
parties to the deed in writing. A stranger to the 
document is not bound by the terms of the 
document and is, therefore, not excluded from 
demonstrating the untrue or collusive nature of 
the document or the fraudulent or illegal purpose 
for which it was brought into being. An enquiry 
into reality of transaction is not excluded merely 
by availability of writing reciting the transaction.”
22. In yet another decision, a three-Judge Bench of 
this Court in Mahendra Saree Emporium (II) v. G.V. 
Srinivasa Murthy considered earlier decisions, few of 
which have been referred to above, while dealing with 
a matter relating to sub-letting of the premises within 
the meaning of Section 21(1)(f) of the Karnataka 
Rent Control Act, 1961 and observed as follows: 
(SCC pp. 490-92, para 16)
“16. The term ‘sub-let’ is not defined in the Act-
new or old. However, the definition of ‘lease’ 
can be adopted mutatis mutandis for defining 
‘sub-lease’. What is ‘lease’ between the owner 
of the property and his tenant becomes a sub-
lease when entered into between the tenant 
and tenant of the tenant, the latter being 
sub-tenant qua the owner landlord. A lease 
of immovable property as defined in Section 
105 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 is a 
transfer of a right to enjoy such property made 
for a certain time for consideration of a price 
paid or promised. A transfer of a right to enjoy 
such property to the exclusion of all others 
during the term of the lease is sine qua non of 
a lease. A sub-lease would imply parting with 
by the tenant of the right to enjoy such property 
in favour of his sub-tenant. Different types of 
phraseology are employed by different State 
Legislatures making provision for eviction on the 

542
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
ground of sub-letting. Under Section 21(1)(f) of 
the old Act, the phraseology employed is quite 
wide. It embraces within its scope sub-letting 
of the whole or part of the premises as also 
assignment or transfer in any other manner of 
the lessee’s interest in the tenancy premises. 
The exact nature of transaction entered into 
or arrangement or understanding arrived at 
between the tenant and alleged sub-tenant 
may not be in the knowledge of the landlord 
and such a transaction being unlawful would 
obviously be entered into in secrecy depriving 
the owner landlord of the means of ascertaining 
the facts about the same. However still, the rent 
control legislation being protective for the tenant 
and eviction being not permissible except on 
the availability of ground therefor having been 
made out to the satisfaction of the court or the 
Controller, the burden of proving the availability 
of the ground is cast on the landlord i.e. the one 
who seeks eviction. In Krishnawati v. Hans 
Raj37 reiterating the view taken in Associated 
Hotels of India Ltd. v. S.B. Sardar Ranjit Singh 
this Court so noted the settled law: (Hans Raj 
case , SCC p. 293, para 6)
‘6. … [T]he onus to prove sub-letting is on the 
landlord. If the landlord prima facie shows 
that the occupant who was in exclusive 
possession of the premises let out for 
valuable consideration, it would then be for 
the tenant to rebut the evidence.’
Thus, in the case of sub-letting, the onus lying on the 
landlord would stand discharged by adducing prima 
facie proof of the fact that the alleged sub-tenant 
was in exclusive possession of the premises or, to 
borrow the language of Section 105 of the Transfer of 
37	
(1974) 1 SCC 289

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
543
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
Property Act, was holding right to enjoy such property. 
A presumption of sub-letting may then be raised and 
would amount to proof unless rebutted. In the context 
of the premises having been sub-let or possession 
parted with by the tenant by adopting the device of 
entering into partnership, it would suffice for us to 
notice three decisions of this Court. Murlidhar v. 
Chuni Lal is a case where a shop was let out to a firm 
of the name of Chuni Lal Gherulal. The firm consisted 
of three partners, namely, Chuni Lal, Gherulal and 
Meghraj. This partnership closed and a new firm 
by the name of Meghraj Bansidhar commenced 
its business with partners Meghraj and Bansidhar. 
The tenant firm was sought to be evicted on the 
ground that the old firm and the new firm being 
two different legal entities, the occupation of the 
shop by the new firm amounted to sub-letting. 
This Court discarded the contention as ‘entirely 
without substance’ and held that a partnership 
firm is not a legal entity; the firm name is only a 
compendious way of describing the partners of 
the firm. Therefore, occupation by a firm is only 
occupation by its partners. The two firms, old and 
new, had a common partner, namely, Meghraj, who 
continued to be in possession and it was fallacious 
to contend that earlier he was in possession in the 
capacity of partner of the old firm and later as a partner 
of the new firm. The landlord, in order to succeed, has 
to prove it as a fact that there was a sub-letting by 
his tenant to another firm. As the premises continued 
to be in possession of one of the original tenants, 
Meghraj, then by a mere change in the constitution of 
the firm of which Meghraj continued to be a partner, 
an inference as to sub-letting could not be drawn in 
the absence of further evidence having been adduced 
to establish sub-letting. In Helper Girdharbhai v. 
Saiyed Mohmad Mirasaheb Kadri the tenant had 
entered into a partnership and the firm was carrying 
on business in the tenancy premises. This Court 
held that if there was a partnership firm of which the 

544
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
appellant was a partner as a tenant, the same would 
not amount to sub-letting leading to forfeiture of the 
tenancy; for there cannot be a sub-letting unless the 
lessee parted with the legal possession. The mere fact 
that another person is allowed to use the premises 
while the lessee retains the legal possession is not 
enough to create a sub-lease. Thus, the thrust is, 
as laid down by this Court, on finding out who is in 
legal possession of the premises. So long as the 
legal possession remains with the tenant the mere 
factum of the tenant having entered into partnership 
for the purpose of carrying on the business in the 
tenancy premises would not amount to sub-letting. 
In Parvinder Singh v. Renu Gautam a three-Judge 
Bench of this Court devised the test in these terms: 
(SCC p. 799, para 8)
‘8. … If the tenant is actively associated with 
the partnership business and retains the use 
and control over the tenancy premises with him, 
maybe along with the partners, the tenant may 
not be said to have parted with possession. 
However, if the user and control of the tenancy 
premises has been parted with and deed of 
partnership has been drawn up as an indirect 
method of collecting the consideration for 
creation of sub-tenancy or for providing a cloak 
or cover to conceal a transaction not permitted 
by law, the court is not estopped from tearing 
the veil of partnership and finding out the real 
nature of transaction entered into between the 
tenant and the alleged sub-tenant.’ ”
23. In Vaishakhi Ram v. Sanjeev Kumar Bhatiani38, 
one of us (Tarun Chatterjee, J.) in a case of sub-
letting under Section 14(1)(b) of the Delhi Rent 
Control Act, held: (SCC pp. 360 & 362, paras 15 
& 21)
38	
(2008) 14 SCC 356

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
545
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
“15. … A plain reading of this provision would 
show that if a tenant has sub-let or assigned 
or otherwise parted with the possession of 
the whole or any part of the premises without 
obtaining the consent in writing of the landlord, 
he would be liable to be evicted from the said 
premises. That is to say, the following ingredients 
must be satisfied before an order of eviction can 
be passed on the ground of sub-letting: 
(1) the tenant has sub-let or assigned or parted 
with the possession of the whole or any part of 
the premises;
(2) such sub-letting or assigning or parting with 
the possession has been done without obtaining 
the consent in writing of the landlord.
…
21. It is well settled that the burden of proving 
sub-letting is on the landlord but if the landlord 
proves that the sub-tenant is in exclusive 
possession of the suit premises, then the onus 
is shifted to the tenant to prove that it was not 
a case of sub-letting.”
24. In Nirmal Kanta v. Ashok Kumar39 this Court 
held thus: (SCC p. 727, para 16)
“16. What constitutes sub-letting has 
repeatedly fallen for the consideration of 
this Court in various cases and it is now 
well established that a sub-tenancy or a 
sub-letting comes into existence when the 
tenant inducts a third-party stranger to the 
landlord into the tenanted accommodation 
and parts with possession thereof wholly 
or in part in favour of such third party and 
puts him in exclusive possession thereof. 
39	
(2008) 7 SCC 722

546
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
The lessor and/or a landlord seeking eviction 
of a lessee or tenant alleging creation of a 
sub-tenancy has to prove such allegation by 
producing proper evidence to that effect. Once 
it is proved that the lessee and/or tenant has 
parted with exclusive possession of the demised 
premises for a monetary consideration, the 
creation of a sub-tenancy and/or the allegation 
of sub-letting stands established.”
25. The legal position that emerges from the aforesaid 
decisions can be summarised thus:
(i) In order to prove mischief of sub-letting 
as a ground for eviction under rent control 
laws, two ingredients have to be established, 
(one) parting with possession of tenancy or 
part of it by the tenant in favour of a third 
party with exclusive right of possession, 
and (two) that such parting with possession 
has been done without the consent of the 
landlord and in lieu of compensation or rent.
(ii) Inducting a partner or partners in the 
business or profession by a tenant by itself 
does not amount to sub-letting. However, if 
the purpose of such partnership is ostensible 
and a deed of partnership is drawn to conceal 
the real transaction of sub-letting, the court 
may tear the veil of partnership to find out 
the real nature of transaction entered into 
by the tenant.
(iii) The existence of deed of partnership between 
the tenant and alleged sub-tenant or ostensible 
transaction in any other form would not preclude 
the landlord from bringing on record material 
and circumstances, by adducing evidence or 
by means of cross-examination, making out a 
case of sub-letting or parting with possession 
in tenancy premises by the tenant in favour of 
a third person.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
547
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
(iv) If the tenant is actively associated with the 
partnership business and retains the control 
over the tenancy premises with him, may be 
along with partners, the tenant may not be said 
to have parted with possession.
(v) Initial burden of proving sub-letting is on 
the landlord but once he is able to establish 
that a third party is in exclusive possession 
of the premises and that tenant has no legal 
possession of the tenanted premises, the 
onus shifts to the tenant to prove the nature 
of occupation of such third party and that he 
(tenant) continues to hold legal possession in 
tenancy premises.
(vi) In other words, initial burden lying on the 
landlord would stand discharged by adducing 
prima facie proof of the fact that a party other 
than the tenant was in exclusive possession 
of the premises. A presumption of sub-letting 
may then be raised and would amount to proof 
unless rebutted.”
14.3.	 From the above decisions, the essence of the law is that:
(i)	
sub-letting requires parting with legal possession, i.e., 
transfer of the right to exclusive possession;
(ii)	
mere induction or retirement of partners does not amount 
to sub-letting so long as the tenant retains control and 
legal possession;
(iii)	
courts are entitled to lift the veil of partnership where 
it is used as a device to conceal an impermissible 
transfer; and
(iv)	
once exclusive possession of a third party is established, 
the burden shifts to the tenant to prove that the 
arrangement is bona fide. 
Thus, the determinative test is whether the original tenant 
continues to retain legal possession and control over the 
premises. 

548
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
14.4.	 It is not in dispute that Respondent No. 4 alone was the 
original tenant under the lease. The material on record 
indicates that he retired from the business around the year 
2000. Significantly, no legally admissible evidence has been 
produced to establish either the factum of such retirement 
in accordance with law or that he continued to retain legal 
possession or control thereafter.
14.5.	 The respondents have failed to produce the original partnership 
deed, any duly proved retirement deed, or any document 
evidencing continuity of the original tenant firm. The alleged 
reconstitution deed (Ex. R3), apart from being unregistered, 
has not been proved in accordance with law and is shrouded 
in doubt. There is also no material to show that Respondent 
Nos. 2 and 3 were partners in the original tenant firm. Their 
induction into possession is, therefore not traceable to the 
original tenancy.
14.6.	 On the contrary, the material on record, including the cross-
examination of RW-1, clearly demonstrates that the original 
tenant has ceased to have any role in the business or the 
premises, and that Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 are in exclusive 
possession and control. This satisfies the test of parting with 
possession, both in fact and in law, as explained in Jagan 
Nath v. Chander Bhan.
14.7.	 Once such exclusive possession by third parties is established, 
the burden shifts to the respondents to prove that the 
arrangement is a genuine partnership and not a device to 
conceal sub-letting. The respondents have failed to discharge 
this burden by producing any cogent or reliable evidence.
14.8.	 The mere fact that rent receipts may continue in the name of 
the original tenant does not advance the respondents’ case, 
as it is legal possession and control and not the formality of 
rent payment, which is determinative. 
14.9.	 In the present case, the original tenant has clearly divested 
himself of legal possession, and Respondent Nos. 2 and 3, 
who are strangers to the tenancy, are in exclusive occupation 
of the premises without the consent of the landlord. The 
so-called reconstitution is nothing but a cloak to conceal an 
unlawful transfer of possession, warranting lifting of the veil. 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
549
Sri M.V. Ramachandrasa Since Deceased Represented by Legal Heirs v. 
M/s Mahendra Watch Company Represented by its Partners & Ors.
14.10.	 Accordingly, the arrangement cannot be regarded as a 
bona fide reconstitution of partnership. It squarely amounts 
to unlawful sub-letting / assignment within the meaning of 
Section 27(2)(b)(ii) of the Karnataka Rent Act, 1999. Further, 
the continued occupation by Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 
without any lawful right, attracts Section 27(2)(p) of the Act. 
The respondents are, therefore, liable to eviction.
15.	 For the reasons aforesaid, the Civil Appeal is allowed. The judgment 
and order dated 23.05.2023 passed by the High Court in House 
Rent Revision Petition No. 56 of 2017 is set aside and the order 
dated 14.07.2017 passed by the trial Court in H.R.C. No. 63 of 2016 
directing eviction of the respondents from the schedule premises 
is restored. The respondents are granted three months’ time from 
today to vacate and handover vacant possession of the premises 
to the appellants. There shall be no order as to costs.
16.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
