[2026] 4 S.C.R. 417 : 2026 INSC 325
Gautam Satnami
v.
State of Chhattisgarh
(Criminal Appeal No. 1782 of 2026)
07 April 2026
[Prashant Kumar Mishra* and Vipul M. Pancholi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the appellant 
is entitled to the benefit of doubt and ought to be acquitted of the 
charge u/s.302 IPC.
Headnotes†
Circumstantial evidence – Suspicion howsoever strong, cannot 
take the place of proof – Appellant was convicted u/s.302, IPC 
based on inter alia the ‘last-seen’ testimony of PW-4; recovery 
of a blood-stained axe and clothes pursuant to disclosure 
u/s.27; and recovery of the driving licence of the appellant 
from the spot – Interference with:
Held: The ‘last-seen’ testimony of PW-4 does not inspire 
confidence – The major distinction between the case of the present 
appellant and that of accused No. 2 (who was acquitted) is the 
‘last-seen’ testimony of PW-4 – If that circumstance is excluded 
from consideration, the position of the present appellant is similar 
enough to that of accused No. 2 and it would be unsafe to sustain 
the conviction of the former, at least preponderantly on the basis 
of this circumstance – Witnesses have either turned hostile or not 
corroborated the case of prosecution on any material particulars in 
relation to the recoveries beyond just admitting their signatures – 
FSL report confirmed that it was human blood that was present 
on the axes and clothes; however, the blood group of either the 
deceased or of the blood present on the weapons or clothes was 
not determined; though it was observed the hair present on the axes 
was similar in morphological and microscopical characteristics to 
the hair recovered from the spot, no conclusive opinion was given 
if it belonged to the deceased; and there was no definitive link 
* Author

418
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
made between the recovered axes and the deceased’s injuries – 
The recovery circumstance remains legally tenuous – Remaining 
circumstances are also weak and inconclusive – As regards motive, 
it is a supporting factor which strengthens an otherwise complete 
chain of evidence but, it cannot replace such a chain where other 
circumstances are missing or weak – Prosecution’s case fails at 
the threshold itself, as each circumstance from which guilt is to be 
inferred is not firmly and fully established – Evidence on record 
may raise suspicion, but, suspicion, however strong, cannot take 
the place of proof – Appellant, like accused No.2 deserves the 
benefit of doubt – Judgment passed by the High Court affirming the 
judgment of the Sessions Judge, is set aside insofar as it relates to 
the appellant – Appellant acquitted – Evidence Act, 1872 – ss.25, 
27. [Paras 22, 24-26, 30, 31 ]
Constitution of India – Arts.134, 136 – Distinction between 
criminal appeals as a matter of right u/Art.134 and the broader, 
discretionary jurisdiction exercised by this Court u/Art.136:
Held: u/Art.134, this Court sits as a regular court of appeal, but 
u/Art.136, ordinarily limits itself to correcting manifest illegality 
and/or grave miscarriage of justice – This is particularly apposite 
in a case like the present Appeal, where the Courts below have 
returned concurrent findings of guilt – However, restrictions are not 
absolute – In fact, both provisions underline that this Court has the 
final, Constitutional responsibility to ensure that justice is done, and 
hence, the nature and scope of Court’s powers u/Art.136 are not 
curtailed where the interests of justice so require. [Paras 12, 13]
Evidence – ‘related’ witness; ‘interested’ witness – Testimony 
of interested witness without corroboration cannot sustain 
conviction:
Held: A ‘related’ witness is not necessarily an ‘interested’ witness, 
and an ‘interested’ witness need not be a ‘related’ one – Based on 
the evidence on record, it is plausible that a witness such as PW-4 
had the requisite direct or indirect interest in seeing the appellant 
punished – His examination-in-chief and cross-examination disclose 
circumstances suggesting that he himself, or at least his ‘group’ or 
the persons closely associated with him, harboured longstanding 
hostility towards the appellant – Therefore, the finding of the 
Trial Court that it was “not established that the witness had any 
animosity with the accused”, or of the High Court that there is “no 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
419
Gautam Satnami v. State of Chhattisgarh
reason to disbelieve his statement”, is not sound – The possibility 
of PW-4 being an interested witness cannot be ruled out, and 
his testimony, at least without independent corroboration, cannot 
sustain the conviction. [Para 19]
Circumstantial evidence – Circumstance of motive – Absence 
of – Appellant was convicted u/s.302, IPC:
Held: Though not expressly considered by Trial Court, it is possible 
accused No. 2’s family relationship with the deceased weighed 
in his favour – In contrast, with respect to the appellant, there is 
some material on the record that points to a specific dispute with 
the deceased – However, the evidence does not establish the 
immediacy or gravity of animosity; if anything, it seems the appellant 
and the deceased continued to be friends and visit one another, 
and may even have been consuming liquor together the evening 
before the deceased died – Motive is a supporting factor which 
strengthens an otherwise complete chain of evidence – It cannot 
replace such a chain where other circumstances are missing or 
weak – Appellant also given the benefit of doubt, acquitted. [Para 30]
Case Law Cited
Sharad Birdhi Chand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, 1984 INSC 
121 : [1985] 1 SCR 88 – relied on. 
Agniraj & Ors. v. State through Deputy Superintendent of Police, 
CBCID, 2025 INSC 774 : [2025] 5 SCR 856; State of Rajasthan v. 
Smt. Kalki & Anr., 1981 INSC 94 : [1981] 3 SCR 504; Md. Rojali 
Ali & Ors. v. The State of Assam, Ministry of Home Affairs through 
the Secretary, 2019 INSC 223; Javed Shaukat Ali Qureshi v. State 
of Gujarat, 2023 INSC 829 : [2023] 12 SCR 220; Ram Singh v. 
State of U.P., 2024 INSC 128 : [2024] 2 SCR 668 – referred to.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Evidence 
Act, 1872; Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Circumstantial evidence; Suspicion howsoever strong cannot take 
the place of proof; ‘Last-seen’ testimony does not inspire confidence; 
Circumstances missing or weak; Article 134, Constitution of India; 
Article 136, Constitution of India.

420
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1782 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 19.07.2017 of the High Court 
of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in CRA No. 677 of 2012.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
A Sirajudeen, Sr. Adv., Ms. Manjeet Chawla, Ms. Shaik Soni 
Ahamed, Vishvanath Agarwal.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Praneet Pranav, D.A.G., Vinayak Sharma, Ravinder Kumar Yadav.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Prashant Kumar Mishra, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The instant Appeal takes exception to the judgment dated 19.07.2017 
passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur in Criminal 
Appeal No. 677 of 2012, whereby the judgment and order dated 
28.07.2012 passed by the Sessions Judge, Rajnandgaon in Sessions 
Case No. 27 of 2011 was affirmed. The Trial Court had convicted 
the sole appellant, Gautam Satnami @ Gautam Deshlahre, who 
was accused No. 1, under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 
18601 and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment with a fine of 
₹5,000 and in case of default in payment of fine to undergo additional 
rigorous imprisonment for one year.
FACTUAL MATRIX
3.	
The deceased, Dhumman @ Surjeet Bhattacharya, resided alone in 
his house in village Dhourabhata and was engaged in the business 
of selling lentils on his motorbike (Luna). His fufa - Ghasi Ram 
1	
For short, “IPC”.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
421
Gautam Satnami v. State of Chhattisgarh
(PW-16), was residing next to his house. The deceased was married 
for 4-5 times, including to one Dharmin Bai (PW-2), who had returned 
to her maternal home a few years before the incident due to disputes 
with the deceased.
4.	
In the evening of 13.01.2011, the deceased was consuming liquor 
in his house with Girish Satnami (PW-12) and Tejprakash Satnami. 
At about 7:00 p.m., Dhanraj (PW-3) overheard noises from the 
deceased’s house, and on stopping by, saw the appellant and 
Dwarika Jangde (accused No. 2 since acquitted) present over there. 
The appellant had a liquor bottle in his hand and was abusing the 
deceased, saying that because of him, the appellant had gone to jail, 
and that one day he would kill him. It is said that two years before 
the incident, the appellant and the deceased had fought with another 
villager, Tikam Sahu, and the deceased had secured bail for him 
while the appellant had to go to jail because he was absconding. 
This spawned an ongoing animosity in their friendship.
5.	
It is further the case of the prosecution that on the next day i.e., 
14.01.2011, the accused went to the deceased’s house at night and 
when the deceased opened the door, the accused, armed with axes, 
inflicted multiple incised injuries on him, resulting in instantaneous 
death on account of shock due to excessive haemorrhage. After 
committing the murder, the accused persons fled from the spot. One 
Raja Ram Deshlahare (PW-4), riding pillion, along with Maniram 
Sahu allegedly saw the appellant with an axe near the deceased’s 
house in the headlight of the motorcycle and he found the lights of 
the house were also turned on.
6.	
The deceased’s body was discovered the next day. One Hiraman 
(PW-1) saw next morning that the door of the deceased’s house ajar, 
blood on both the door and the floor, and the deceased’s corpse 
partially covered with a bedsheet. He suspected the appellant for the 
murder as the appellant had a criminal antecedent and was having 
enmity with the deceased for some time. Hiraman (PW-1) went 
and informed Ghasi Ram, and they visited the spot. Other villagers 
were also informed, after which merg intimation was lodged by the 
brother-in-law of the deceased namely, Komal Das (PW-8), against 
unknown person(s). Thereafter, the dehati nalishi was registered on 
the same day around 2:00 p.m. wherein Komal Das stated that he 

422
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
saw half-open door of the deceased’s house, blood stains and hair 
on the door, and clothes and other articles scattered near the divan 
bed, as well as the presence of injuries caused by a sharp-edged 
weapon on the person of the deceased. Police officials reached the 
spot, prepared the inquest panchnama of the dead body, and sent 
it for post-mortem.
7.	
After the spot-inspection, a seizure memo was prepared, bearing the 
signatures of Komal and Roopdas Sahu (PW-9), wherein the Police 
recorded that they collected the blood-stained hairs and soil, liquor 
bottles, land record in the name of Tularam Bhattacharya (father 
of the deceased), a notebook belonging to the deceased, and the 
driver’s license of the appellant from the spot. A pair of dusty blue 
full-pants with ₹7,800 cash in the pocket was also recovered from 
the ganj (container).
8.	
The post-mortem examination, conducted by Dr. Kiran Chandekar 
(PW-10), revealed six injuries on the eyes, face, head, chest, shoulder, 
and finger of the deceased, and noted skull fractures and extrusion 
of brain matter. The medical opinion was that death occurred due to 
shock caused by excessive hemorrhage and had taken place 18-24 
hours before the autopsy (conducted at 4:30 p.m. on 15.01.2011), 
putting the time of death approximately between 4:30 p.m. and 10:30 
p.m. on the previous day. Finally, First Information Report No. 18 
of 2011 was registered under Section 302 IPC against unknown 
person(s) at 8:30 p.m.
9.	
Next day i.e., 16.1.2011, the Police took the accused persons into 
custody and questioned them. Allegedly, they gave confessional 
statements on the basis of which the Police arrested them on 
17.1.2011. On 17.1.2011, the Police conducted seizures and 
recovered a blood-stained axe and clothes from each of their houses. 
After the investigation was completed, a charge-sheet was submitted 
and the case was committed for trial before the learned Sessions 
Judge, Rajnandgaon. The learned Sessions Judge in Sessions 
Case No. 27 of 2011 acquitted accused No. 2 (Dwarika Jangde) 
but convicted the present appellant/accused no.1 under Section 
302 of the IPC. As stated above, the appellant had unsuccessfully 
preferred a criminal appeal before the High Court challenging his 
conviction and sentence and now approaches this Court by way of 
the instant Appeal.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
423
Gautam Satnami v. State of Chhattisgarh
SUBMISSIONS
10.	 Mr. A Sirajudeen, learned senior counsel for the appellant, contended 
that the prosecution has failed to present the true origin and genesis 
of the incident and that the material contradictions and omissions 
elicited during cross-examination, which were favourable to the 
appellant, were either ignored or improperly appreciated. Learned 
senior counsel further urged that most prosecution witnesses did not 
support the prosecution’s case vis-à-vis its material particulars and 
specifically, that the seizure witnesses themselves denied signing the 
seizure memos at the spot and their signatures were only obtained 
later. It was also urged that while accused No. 2 was acquitted on the 
same circumstantial evidence, the appellant was convicted without 
any sustainable distinguishing circumstance. Particular emphasis was 
placed on the alleged recovery of the appellant’s driving licence from 
the scene, which was not produced along with the charge-sheet and 
was only later introduced into the record of the Trial Court. Learned 
senior counsel thus argued that the prosecution did not prove the 
charge under Section 302 of the IPC beyond reasonable doubt and 
the conviction is totally unsustainable in law.
11.	 Per contra, Mr. Praneet Pranav, learned Deputy Advocate General 
for the State of Chhattisgarh, submitted that instant case is a proved 
case of murder. It was contended that both, the Trial Court and the 
High Court, correctly appreciated the evidence on record, and there 
is no perversity warranting interference under Article 136 of the 
Constitution. The prosecution’s case, as accepted by both Courts, 
establishes prior enmity between the appellant and the deceased; a 
quarrel and threat issued by the appellant on the evening preceding 
the incident; the presence of the appellant near the deceased’s 
house on the night of the incident, carrying an axe, as deposed by 
Raja Ram; recovery of a blood-stained axe and clothes pursuant 
to disclosure under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 18722; 
detection of human blood and human hair on the seized articles as 
per the FSL report; and recovery of the driving licence of the appellant 
from the spot. It was further submitted that the appellant failed to offer 
any plausible explanation under Section 313 of the Cr.PC regarding 
these incriminating circumstances, which together form a complete 
and unbroken chain pointing to the guilt of the appellant.
2	
For short, “Evidence Act”.

424
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
ANALYSIS
12.	 At the outset, it is necessary to acknowledge the well-settled distinction 
between criminal appeals as a matter of right under Article 134 of the 
Constitution, and the broader, discretionary jurisdiction exercised by 
this Court under Article 136. Under Article 134, this Court sits as a 
regular court of appeal, but under Article 136, ordinarily limits itself 
to correcting manifest illegality and/or grave miscarriage of justice. 
This is particularly apposite in a case like the present Appeal, where 
the Courts below have returned concurrent findings of guilt. 
13.	 However, it is equally well-settled that any restrictions are not 
absolute. In fact, both provisions underline that this Court has the 
final, Constitutional responsibility to ensure that justice is done, 
and hence, the nature and scope of Court’s powers under Article 
136 are not curtailed where the interests of justice so require. We 
may profitably refer to this Court’s observation in the recent case 
of Agniraj & Ors. vs. State through Deputy Superintendent of 
Police, CB-CID3, wherein precedents on Article 136 were described 
as “self-imposed constraints on interference” 4 that cannot restrain 
the Court from taking note of “...striking features in the evidence 
which demolish the prosecution’s case.” 5
14.	 Here, the Trial Court itself has noted that “the case of prosecution is 
based on the circumstantial evidence and there is no direct evidence 
in the case.” This necessarily calls for a careful re-examination of 
certain incriminating circumstances, particularly where they expose 
the chain of evidence to doubt. At this stage, we may briefly recount 
the five ‘golden principles’ laid down in Sharad Birdhi Chand Sarda 
vs. State of Maharashtra6, i.e.: 
I.	
the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be 
drawn should be fully established;
II.	
the facts so established should be consistent only with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say. they 
should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that 
the accused is guilty;
3	
2025 INSC 774
4	
Id at ¶ 39.
5	
Id at ¶ 38.1.
6	
1984 INSC 121 at ¶3.3.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
425
Gautam Satnami v. State of Chhattisgarh
III.	
the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and 
tendency;
IV.	
they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one 
to be proved; and
V.	
there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave 
any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the 
innocence of the accused and must show that in all human 
probability the act must have been done by the accused.
15.	 We observe that the strongest circumstance considered by the Courts 
below against the appellant, specifically, is the so-called ‘last-seen’ 
evidence of Raja Ram. As discussed above, Raja Ram had deposed 
that he saw the appellant near the deceased’s house on the night of 
the incident, carrying an axe. Raja Ram and other PWs admit that 
there were no street lights near the house of the deceased, and the 
spot was usually covered in darkness. The identification, therefore, 
could only have been made in the light of a motorcycle and possibly, 
the light of the house (as stated by Raja Ram). On the latter point, 
both, Dharmin Bai and Dhanraj, had stated in their cross-examination 
that there was no electricity supply in the deceased’s house. In these 
circumstances, the conditions for reliable visual identification at night 
are certainly doubtful. 
16.	 Moreover, even if Raja Ram’s testimony is accepted at face value, 
it only states that the appellant was present near the deceased’s 
house at about 10:00 p.m. carrying an axe. In this case, the medical 
evidence has not fixed the time of death with enough precision so 
as to conclusively correlate his presence there with the commission 
of the offence. Raja Ram himself does not assert that he saw the 
appellant enter the house, assault the deceased, or perform any overt 
act. The deposition, at best, places the appellant in the vicinity of the 
spot, not with the deceased, and does not possess the ‘clinching’ or 
determinative value that can, by itself, sustain a conviction.
17.	 We also note that, in his cross-examination, Raja Ram had stated 
that he worked together with Maniram and Maniram’s wife, Madhuri 
Bai, at Bhatiya’s dairy, and that the appellant had also worked there 
earlier. During this period, hostility had developed and the appellant 
had left the dairy. Raja Ram further admitted that the animosity 
between the appellant and Krishna, the elder brother of Maniram, was 

426
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to such an extent that Krishna left the village, and also that Madhuri 
had earlier lodged a case of eve-teasing against the appellant which 
was eventually compromised in Court, though he denied that he was 
supporting Maniram and Madhuri due to his “family relationship” 
with them. Raja Ram also accepted that he had deposed against 
the appellant in another case and was specifically questioned on 
the point of him and Maniram having given statements against the 
appellant in multiple proceedings. 
18.	 A three-Judge Bench of this Court in State of Rajasthan vs. Smt. 
Kalki & Anr.7 had held:
“5. …’Related’ is not equivalent to ‘interested’. A witness 
may be called ‘interested’ only when he or she derives 
some benefit from the result of a litigation; in the decree in 
a civil case, or in seeing an accused person punished. …”
In Md. Rojali Ali & Ors. vs. The State of Assam, Ministry of Home 
Affairs through the Secretary8, this Court had further clarified: 
“10. …This Court has elucidated the difference between 
‘interested’ and ‘related’ witnesses in a plethora of cases, 
stating that a witness may be called interested only when 
he or she derives some benefit from the result of a litigation, 
which in the context of a criminal case would mean that 
the witness has a direct or indirect interest in seeing the 
accused punished due to prior enmity or other reasons, 
and thus has a motive to falsely implicate the accused. …”
19.	 Therefore, a ‘related’ witness is not necessarily an ‘interested’ witness, 
and an ‘interested’ witness need not be a ‘related’ one. Based on the 
evidence on record, it is plausible that a witness such as Raja Ram 
had the requisite direct or indirect interest in seeing the appellant 
punished. His examination-in-chief and cross-examination disclose 
circumstances suggesting that he himself, or at least his ‘group’ or the 
persons closely associated with him, harboured longstanding hostility 
towards the appellant. Therefore, the finding of the Trial Court that 
it was “not established that the witness had any animosity with the 
accused”, or of the High Court that there is “no reason to disbelieve 
7	
1981 INSC 94.
8	
2019 INSC 223

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
427
Gautam Satnami v. State of Chhattisgarh
his statement”, is not sound. The possibility of Raja Ram being an 
interested witness cannot be ruled out, and his testimony, at least 
without independent corroboration, cannot sustain the conviction. 
Besides, we must point out that the witness’s own conduct also 
discounts the reliability of his testimony. In his cross-examination, 
Raja Ram had admitted that he met the Police on the very day of the 
incident; despite this, his statement under Section 161 of the Cr.PC 
was recorded only on 14.02.2011 i.e., a month after the occurrence.
20.	 We now turn to the next major incriminating circumstance relied 
upon by the prosecution. Needless to say, under Section 25 of the 
Evidence Act, any ‘confession’ made to a police officer shall not 
be admissible at all. The accused in this case have supposedly 
given ‘memorandums’ or disclosure statements under Section 27 of 
Evidence Act. We will examine if the recoveries supposedly made 
as a consequence of these statements withstand legal scrutiny.
21.	 Both accused put forth substantially similar narratives in the respective 
disclosure statements. In fact, the language in many places is 
reproduced verbatim in both statements, except the conclusions, 
where they state that the axe and clothes worn at the time of the 
incident are concealed in their respective rooms. The axes and 
clothes were consequently recovered from these spots. 
22.	 Dr. Chandekar had recommended that the seized axes and clothes 
be sent for forensic examination to determine whether the bloodstains 
present on them were human, and whether the hair adhering to the 
axes belonged to the deceased. It was further opined that the injuries 
on the deceased had been inflicted by a hard, sharp-edged object. 
The FSL report confirmed that it was human blood that was present 
on the axes and clothes; however, (i) the blood group of either the 
deceased or of the blood present on the weapons or clothes was 
not determined; (ii) though it was observed the hair present on the 
axes was similar in morphological and microscopical characteristics 
to the hair recovered from the spot, no conclusive opinion was given 
if it belonged to the deceased; and (iii) there was no definitive link 
made between the recovered axes and the deceased’s injuries. In 
fact, Khuman Sahu (PW-5) had stated in cross-examination that 
every farmer in the village kept an axe. In order to bring home the 
guilt of the accused, the seized weapons ought to have at least been 
shown to the doctor for an opinion as to whether they had caused 
the injuries in question.

428
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
23.	 Now, without even embarking on an independent re-evaluation, we note 
that the Trial Court had considered the entire recovery circumstance 
against accused No. 2 and acquitted him in the following terms: 
“24. On the intimation of the accused Dwarika (No.2), his 
clothes and axe had been seized by the prosecution and as 
per the Report Exhibit P-22 from the Forensic Science Lab, 
blood had been found on thein. There is no evidence on the 
document regarding the presence of the accused Dwarika 
on the scene during the incident. It has not been proved that 
the blood found on the axe and the clothes seized from the· 
accused Dwarika is human blood and there is not any other 
circumstances proved against the accused. It has been held 
in the case of Nehru versus C.G. State, 2005 (1) Manisa 
90 (C.G.) that the only circumstance of blood found on the 
weapon and cloth is enough to connect it to murder. It has 
been held in the case of Hanumant Govind Nardandurkar 
Versus State A.I.R 1960 Supreme Court 29 that the link of 
the circumstances from which the conviction of the accused 
to be concluded has been proved completely. Even if a 
single link is missed, so the accused persons cannot be 
held guilty. It has not been proved that the blood found on 
the axe seized from the accused was human blood and 
the said blood was related to the deceased. Therefore on 
the basis of the only circumstance it cannot be said firmly 
that the accused Dwarika was involved in the murder of 
the deceased Dhumman.”
24.	 We feel this reasoning adopted applies with equal force to the case 
of the present appellant. The major distinction between the case of 
the present appellant and that of accused No. 2 (Dwarika Jangde) is 
the ‘last-seen’ testimony of Raja Ram, which, as we have discussed 
above, does not inspire confidence. If that circumstance is excluded 
from consideration, the position of the present appellant is similar 
enough to that of accused No. 2 (Dwarika Jangde) that it would be 
unsafe to sustain the conviction of the former, at least preponderantly 
on the basis of this circumstance. In this regard, we refer to the 
observation made by this Court in Javed Shaukat Ali Qureshi vs. 
State of Gujarat 9:
9	
2023 INSC 829.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
429
Gautam Satnami v. State of Chhattisgarh
“15. When there is similar or identical evidence of 
eyewitnesses against two accused by ascribing them the 
same or similar role, the Court cannot convict one accused 
and acquit the other. In such a case, the cases of both the 
accused will be governed by the principle of parity. This 
principle means that the Criminal Court should decide like 
cases alike, and in such cases, the Court cannot make a 
distinction between the two accused, which will amount 
to discrimination.”
(emphasis supplied)
This was reaffirmed in Ram Singh vs. State of U.P.10. Therefore, the 
acquittal of accused No. 2 (Dwarika Jangde) persuades us to resolve 
any doubt vis-à-vis the recoveries in favour of the present appellant. 
25.	 Separately, we also note the contradictions in the testimonies of 
the witnesses to (i) both Section 27 memorandums and (ii) both 
seizure memos.
(i)	
Girish and Manna Lal (PW-6) were cited as witnesses to the 
Section 27 statements made by the accused. Girish stated 
that suspicion had initially fallen upon him and that the Police 
had taken him and the appellant into custody at the same time 
and had taken away and kept Girish’s phone for two days. 
Interestingly, he also denied that accused No. 2 made any 
disclosure to the Police. Manna Lal outright turned hostile and 
denied that either accused had disclosed anything and stated 
that the Police had caught him and taken his signature on the 
documents.
(ii)	
Of the two witnesses to the seizure memos, Khuman essentially 
admitted in cross-examination that the seizure memo was not 
signed contemporaneously at the place of recovery, as he stated 
that he affixed his signature around 2:30-3:00 p.m. when he 
was en route to another village. He also stated that the Police 
told him, “You people have made signature on the panchnama, 
so make your signatures on the seizure also.” The second 
10	
2024 INSC 128 at ¶32. 

430
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
witness, Jhumuk Lal (PW-11), was declared hostile, as he said 
he had incomplete and no information about the recoveries 
made from the present appellant and accused No. 2 (Dwarika 
Jangde), respectively.
It is evident that the witnesses have either turned hostile or not 
corroborated the case of prosecution on any material particulars 
in relation to the recoveries beyond just admitting their signatures. 
Given that both accused continuously remained in judicial custody 
throughout the trial, the said hostility and non-corroboration can also 
not be attributed to any influence or tampering on their part. The 
recovery circumstance, therefore, remains legally tenuous. 
26.	 Moreover, the remaining distinguishing circumstances relied upon 
the appellant are also weak and inconclusive. In the interest of 
completeness, we will now advert to these circumstances.
27.	 Much has been made of the alleged recovery of the appellant’s 
driving licence from the spot at around 2:00 p.m. on 15.01.2011. 
This recovery, together with various villagers’ Section 161 Cr.PC 
statements, had directed initial suspicion toward the appellant. Of 
the two witnesses who signed the seizure memo, one of them i.e., 
Komal, has stated that he did not know which articles the Police 
recovered from the spot of the incident; only that when he was 
standing outside, they showed him the licence and said they were 
taking it. He admits he could not identify the owner of the license 
and was not told who it belonged to either.
28.	 We further observe that the Investigating Officer, Avadh Ram Sahu, 
(PW-15) admitted in cross-examination that the driving licence was 
not mentioned in or submitted along with the ‘challan’ or charge-
sheet and had to be subsequently called for and exhibited as Article 
“A”. Later, in his statement under Section 313 of the Cr.PC, the 
appellant had denied that the licence had been recovered from the 
spot and stated that it had instead been taken from his pocket by 
the Police, but the Trial Court had said that the “said explanation 
of the accused [was] not acceptable,” and had considered it an 
incriminating circumstance against the appellant. However, we feel 
that the aforementioned factors, considered cumulatively, reinforce 
that this particular circumstance remains shrouded in doubt and 
cannot be relied upon.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
431
Gautam Satnami v. State of Chhattisgarh
29.	 Even with respect to the circumstance of the alleged altercation 
during the evening of 13.01.2011, Girish, who admits to being 
present in the deceased’s house that day, did not implicate either 
of the accused in his Section 164 Cr.PC statement. Dhanraj, one 
of the two people whose police statements formed the basis of the 
prosecution’s narrative of a prior threat, totally recanted that version 
in his deposition. The other witness, Ghasi Ram, similarly turned 
hostile and stated that he had closed his shop around 8:00-8:30 p.m. 
and did not hear anything before or after. It cannot, therefore, even 
be proved that the appellant quarrelled with and issued a threat to 
the deceased that evening.
30.	 That leaves only the circumstance of motive. Though not expressly 
considered by Trial Court, it is possible accused No. 2’s (Dwarika 
Jangde) family relationship with the deceased weighed in his favour. 
In contrast, with respect to the appellant, there is some material 
on the record that points to a specific dispute with the deceased. 
However, first, the evidence does not establish the immediacy or 
gravity of animosity; if anything, it seems the appellant and the 
deceased continued to be friends and visit one another, and may 
even have been consuming liquor together the evening before 
the deceased died. Second, motive is a supporting factor which 
strengthens an otherwise complete chain of evidence. It cannot 
replace such a chain where other circumstances are missing or 
weak. 
31.	 Here, the prosecution’s case fails at the threshold itself, as each 
circumstance from which guilt is to be inferred is not firmly and fully 
established. By way of example, it cannot even be said with certainty 
that the driving licence was recovered from the spot in the manner 
alleged, let alone that its presence there was consistent only with 
the hypothesis of guilt. The evidence on record may raise suspicion, 
but, suspicion, however strong, cannot take the place of proof. Our 
considered opinion is that the appellant, like accused No. 2 (Dwarika 
Jangde), deserves the benefit of doubt.
CONCLUSION
32.	 Accordingly, the Appeal is allowed. The judgment dated 19.07.2017 
passed by the High Court of Chhattisgarh in Criminal Appeal No. 677 
of 2012 affirming the judgment and order dated 28.07.2012 passed 

432
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
by the learned Sessions Judge, Rajnandgaon in Sessions Case No. 
27 of 2011, is set aside insofar as it relates to the appellant, and 
he is acquitted of the charge under Section 302 IPC. Since he was 
already on bail pursuant to the order of this Court dated 22.04.2025, 
his bail bonds shall stand discharged.
Pending applications are disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
