[2026] 4 S.C.R. 350 : 2026 INSC 313
Punjab & Sind Bank
v.
Sh. Raj Kumar
(Civil Appeal No. 847 of 2026)
02 April 2026
[Dipankar Datta* and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the imposition of lighter punishment on the co-delinquents 
while imposing the punishment of ‘dismissal from service’ upon 
the respondent is in outright defiance of logic.
Headnotes†
Punjab and Sind Officer Employees’ (Conduct) Regulations, 
1981 – Dismissal from service – Allegation that respondent 
connived with two others (one officer and a gunman) to 
misappropriate money of the customers for their personal 
gain, stealing bank records, etc. – The disciplinary authority 
imposed the penalty of compulsory retirement on the co-
delinquent gunman while the co-delinquent officer was 
awarded “lowering by two stages” – The punishment of 
dismissal was imposed on the respondent (senior manager 
at the relevant time) – Writ petition – The Single Judge 
of the High Court modified the punishment of ‘dismissal 
from service’ imposed upon the respondent to ‘compulsory 
retirement’ on the ground of discrimination in imposition of 
punishment thereby offending Art.14 of the Constitution – 
Same was affirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court – 
Correctness:
Held: The imposition of lighter punishment on the co-delinquents 
while imposing the punishment of ‘dismissal from service’ upon 
the respondent is not in outright defiance of logic – Sight cannot 
be lost of the fact that the respondent, when he committed the 
offence, was holding the post of “Senior Manager in MMGS-III 
Scale”, which is obviously much higher than the codelinquents 
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
351
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
(officer and gunman) – Authority carries accountability; higher the 
authority, higher the accountability – The rank of the respondent 
was not merely titular; it carried with it an increased degree of 
responsibility and integrity – The role of the respondent not only 
necessitated personal obedience but also supervision of the 
actions of the subordinates – The co-delinquents, having limited 
powers and authority, could not have been equated with the 
respondent – The gravity of the misconduct necessarily had to 
be measured with the nature of the misconduct – Thus, grant of 
the benefit of parity to the respondent by the High Court merely 
because the co-delinquents were given lighter punishment was 
entirely misconceived – The disciplinary authority found it prudent 
in the circumstances to impose a harsher punishment on a higher-
ranking official – The High Court clearly fell in error in the course 
of adjudication of the lis – The interference by the Single Judge 
with the decision of the disciplinary authority, since affirmed by 
the Division Bench vide the impugned order, was uncalled for – 
The punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority (namely, 
dismissal from service) imposed on the respondent is restored. 
[Paras 12-14, 17, 18]
Service Law – Interference with an order of punishment 
imposed – Power of Judicial review:
Held: Normally, no court in exercise of its power of judicial 
review should interfere with an order of punishment imposed on 
a delinquent as a measure of disciplinary action by the competent 
authority and substitute its own judgment for that of the former – 
This is premised on the reason that the disciplinary authority is the 
best judge of the situation, and the requirements of maintaining 
discipline within the work force – However, interference could 
be warranted if a punishment, which is strikingly or shockingly 
disproportionate and is not commensurate with the gravity of 
misconduct, proved to have been committed in course of inquiry 
or otherwise, would border on arbitrariness and offend Art.14 of 
the Constitution – Judicial scrutiny and interference, if at all, has to 
be based on reasons in support of the court’s ultimate satisfaction 
that the disciplinary authority has faltered in the exercise of his 
discretion. [Paras 9-12]

352
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Law Cited
Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh (1983) 2 SCC 442; 
Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India [1988] 1 SCR 512 : (1987) 4 SCC 
611; B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India [1995] Supp. 4 SCR 644 : 
(1995) 6 SCC 749; Union of India v. G. Ganayutham [1997] Supp. 
3 SCR 549 : (1997) 7 SCC 463; Om Kumar v. Union of India [2000] 
Supp. 4 SCR 693 : (2001) 2 SCC 386; Union of India v. R.K. 
Sharma [2001] Supp. 3 SCR 664 : (2001) 9 SCC 592; Chairman 
and Managing Director, United Commercial Bank v. P.C. Kakkar 
[2003] 1 SCR 1034 : (2003) 4 SCC 364; State of Gujarat v. Anand 
Acharya (2007) 9 SCC 310; S.R. Tewari v. Union of India [2013] 
8 SCR 988 : (2013) 6 SCC 602; Rajasthan SRTC v. Bajrang Lal 
(2014) 8 SCC 693 – relied on.
Sengara Singh v. State of Punjab (1983) 4 SCC 225 – referred to.
List of Acts
Punjab and Sind Officer Employees’ (Conduct) Regulations, 1981; 
Constitution of India.
List of Keywords
Service Law; Judicial review; Disciplinary action; Competent 
Authority; Disciplinary Authority; Dismissal from service; Degree of 
responsibility; Accountability; Judicial scrutiny; Lighter punishment; 
Principle of Parity.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
847 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 11.09.2024 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in LPA No. 410 of 2023.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Rajesh Kumar Gautam, Anant Gautam, Deepanjal Chaudhary, 
Ms. Azal Aekram, Ms. Likvi K Jhakalu.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
G.S. Chaturvedi, Shantanu Chaturvedi, Surya Kant.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
353
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Dipankar Datta, J.
The greater the trust reposed, the stricter the scrutiny imposed.
1.	
The present appeal, by special leave, at the instance of Punjab and 
Sind Bank1 takes exception to the judgment and order dated 11th 
September, 20242 of the High Court of Delhi3. Vide the impugned order, 
a writ appeal4 filed by the P&SB was dismissed and the judgment 
and order5 of the Single Judge, allowing a writ petition filed by the 
respondent, affirmed. The Single Judge modified the punishment of 
‘dismissal from service’ imposed upon the respondent to ‘compulsory 
retirement’ on the ground of discrimination in imposition of punishment 
thereby offending Article 14 of the Constitution.
2.	
Facts, triggering this appeal, are these:
a.	
Respondent joined the P&SB as a Clerk/Cashier in the year 
1987 until he was placed under suspension in December of 
2011, followed by disciplinary action of dismissal from service on 
25th November, 2024. At the time of dismissal, the respondent 
held the post of “Senior Manager in MMGS-III Scale”.
b.	
The punishment of dismissal imposed on the respondent (senior 
manager at the relevant time) was preceded by a show cause 
notice, a chargesheet and an inquiry in accordance with the 
Punjab and Sind Officer Employees’ (Conduct) Regulations, 
1981 on the allegation that the respondent connived with 
two others (one officer6 and a gunman7) to misappropriate 
money of the customers for their personal gain, stealing bank 
records, etc. The disciplinary authority imposed the penalty of 
1	
P&SB
2	
impugned order
3	
High Court
4	
LPA No. 410 of 2023
5	
dated 3rd February, 2023
6	
Gurjant Singh 
7	
Sukhdev Singh

354
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
compulsory retirement on the co-delinquent gunman while the 
co-delinquent officer was awarded “lowering by two stages”. 
The precise import of the said punishment remains unclear; 
however, we assume that the expression denotes a reduction 
in ‘pay’ by two stages.
c.	
Dejected, the respondent unsuccessfully filed an appeal and 
subsequently a review against the order of the disciplinary 
authority but to no avail. Seeking his reinstatement, the 
respondent then approached the writ court by filing a writ 
petition8. 
d.	
Initially, the said writ petition was disposed of by a Single Judge 
vide order dated 12th December, 2017. After rejecting the claim 
of the respondent on the merits of the disciplinary proceedings, 
the Single Judge directed the appellate authority to impose 
an appropriate punishment upon the respondent keeping the 
principle of parity in mind. Respondent carried the said order 
in an intra-court appeal9, which was disposed of by a Division 
Bench (vide order dated 8th January, 2019) by setting aside the 
order under appeal and directing the Single Judge to decide 
the writ petition on merits. 
e.	
Apart from challenging the decision on merits, the respondent’s 
claim before the High Court was also that he was discriminated 
against in imposition of punishment; while one of the co-
delinquents was compulsorily retired and the other awarded 
punishment of “lowering by two stages”, he was dismissed 
from service. Later, before the Single Judge who decided the 
writ petition on remand, the respondent limited his challenge 
only to the quantum of punishment, on the ground of parity 
with the co-delinquents. The Single Judge proceeded to allow 
the writ petition after noting that for similar charges, different 
punishments were imposed on the co-delinquents with the 
respondent having been given the most severe punishment 
without any difference in their roles. Relevant paragraphs from 
the judgment of the Single Judge are reproduced below: 
8	
WP (C) No. 11034/2017
9	
LPA No. 708 of 2018

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
355
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
11. The only issue that this Court is required to delve into is 
to test the correctness and legality of the action of Punjab 
and Sind Bank in awarding the punishment of dismissal to 
the Petitioner while awarding lesser punishment to those 
alleged and proved to have acted in ‘connivance’……
16. From a conspectus of the aforementioned judgments, 
it is luminously clear that doctrine of equality enshrined 
in Article 14 of the Constitution of India is not an abstract 
doctrine and is enforceable in Court of Law. It is applicable 
to all equally placed even if they are guilty and the principle 
of parity has to be kept in mind by the disciplinary authority 
tasked to decide the quantum of punishment. ………… 
19. Having perused the respective charges, it is amply 
clear that the charges against the Petitioner and the two 
co-delinquent employees related to the same transactions/
incidents and the gravamen of the allegations was the 
same………. This Court is unable to find any substantial 
difference in the charges levelled against the three co-
delinquents, which would justify a differential treatment 
in punishment, save and except, that the Petitioner in his 
capacity as Bank Manager had signed the documents and/
or checked the transactions in question. This by itself is not 
an aggravating factor of such a magnitude, which would 
justify one co- delinquent being sent home on compulsory 
retirement, remaining entitled to pensionary and terminal 
benefits for life and thereafter family pension to his family 
and the other being dismissed, entailing forfeiture of the 
entire past service, not only depriving him of all retiral/
terminal benefits but leaving the dependents in his family 
in a state of penury.
20. In my view, Bank has been unable to substantiate 
and justify why the Petitioner was awarded the extreme 
punishment of dismissal while the other two have been 
let off with lesser punishment… .
23. Looking at the punishments awarded to the co-
delinquents for same incidents/transactions and acts of 
connivance and testing the impugned action on the anvil 
of Article 14 of the Constitution of India as well as keeping 

356
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in mind the long and unblemished spell of service of the 
Petitioner, save and except, the present delinquency, this 
Court is inclined to convert the punishment from ‘dismissal’ 
to one of ‘compulsory retirement’… .
(emphasis ours)
f.	
This order was carried in an intra-court appeal by the P&SB 
which has been dismissed vide the impugned order. The Division 
Bench found no perversity in the order of the Single Judge.
3.	
Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gautam, learned counsel for the P&SB cited 
authorities to buttress his point as to how interference with the order 
of punishment by the High Court is contrary to settled principles of 
law and, thus, merits interdiction by this Court.
4.	
Per contra, Mr. G.S. Chaturvedi, representing the respondent, 
supported the impugned order upholding the decision of the Single 
Judge by referring to the invidious discrimination that he was subjected 
to. Additionally, he invited our attention to an observation made by 
a Division Bench of the High Court in its order dated 8th January, 
2019 to the following effect:
9. It appears that on 2nd January, 2012 while he was still 
under suspension, the Appellant wrote a letter to the Bank 
in Hindi stating that if there was any mistake on his part 
while working as the Branch Manager at Roshanpur, he 
was prepared to make good the loss incurred by the Bank. 
He further stated that on that date he had deposited Rs. 2 
lacs. It appears that a police complaint was also filed. This 
led to the Appellant submitting another handwritten letter 
in Hindi which was received by the Bank on 19th May,2012 
whereby upon the direction of the police, he deposited 
demand drafts worth Rs. 4,19,214.00/-. The last few lines 
of the said letter are significant where he stated “sriman ji 
meri koi galti nahi hai bahut dabav ke karan paise jama 
kar raha hu. Samaaj mein apni izzat bachae rakhne ke 
liye kar raha hu”. Prima facie, therefore, appears that on 
both the occasions, the Petitioner was depositing money 
under pressure and neither of his letters could be actually 
viewed as an admission of guilt by the Appellant.
(italics in original, underlining ours)

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
357
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
The plea advanced (though abandoned before the benches of the 
High Court) touches upon the merits of the respondent’s claim of 
innocence and that he was unfairly punished. 
5.	
Counsel for the parties have been heard and the materials on record 
perused.
6.	
The disciplinary action taken by the P&SB having not been assailed 
on its merits by the respondent before the Single Judge except the 
quantum of punishment, we are tasked to decide a limited point.
7.	
In light of the facts and circumstances of the present case, we are 
reminded of the consistent line of decisions of this Court delineating 
the circumstances in which judicial interference is warranted in matters 
concerning imposition of punishment by disciplinary authorities. 
8.	
We consider it apt to note the relevant passages from a few of these 
decisions, hereunder:-
a.	
Bhagat Ram v. State of Himachal Pradesh10:
15. …It is equally true that the penalty imposed must 
be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct, 
and that any penalty disproportionate to the gravity of 
the misconduct would be violative of Article 14 of the 
Constitution. …
b.	
Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India11:
25. Judicial review generally speaking, is not directed 
against a decision, but is directed against the “decision-
making process”. The question of the choice and quantum 
of punishment is within the jurisdiction and discretion of the 
court-martial. But the sentence has to suit the offence and 
the offender. It should not be vindictive or unduly harsh. 
It should not be so disproportionate to the offence as to 
shock the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive 
evidence of bias. The doctrine of proportionality, as part 
of the concept of judicial review, would ensure that even 
on an aspect which is, otherwise, within the exclusive 
10	
(1983) 2 SCC 442
11	
(1987) 4 SCC 611

358
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
province of the court-martial, if the decision of the court 
even as to sentence is an outrageous defiance of logic, 
then the sentence would not be immune from correction. 
Irrationality and perversity are recognised grounds of 
judicial review… .
(emphasis ours)
c.	
B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India12 (three-Judge Bench):
18. A review of the above legal position would establish 
that the disciplinary authority, and on appeal the appellate 
authority, being fact-finding authorities have exclusive 
power to consider the evidence with a view to maintain 
discipline. They are invested with the discretion to impose 
appropriate punishment keeping in view the magnitude or 
gravity of the misconduct. The High Court/Tribunal, while 
exercising the power of judicial review, cannot normally 
substitute its own conclusion on penalty and impose some 
other penalty. If the punishment imposed by the disciplinary 
authority or the appellate authority shocks the conscience 
of the High Court/Tribunal, it would appropriately mould the 
relief, either directing the disciplinary/appellate authority 
to reconsider the penalty imposed, or to shorten the 
litigation, it may itself, in exceptional and rare cases, 
impose appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in 
support thereof.
d.	
Union of India v. G. Ganayutham13 (three-Judge Bench): 
Punishment in disciplinary matters: Wednesbury and 
CCSU tests
32. Finally, we come to the present case. It is not contended 
before us that any fundamental freedom is affected. We 
need not therefore go into the question of “proportionality”. 
There is no contention that the punishment imposed 
is illegal or vitiated by procedural impropriety. As to 
“irrationality”, there is no finding by the Tribunal that the 
12	
(1995) 6 SCC 749
13	
(1997) 7 SCC 463

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
359
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
decision is one which no sensible person who weighed the 
pros and cons could have arrived at nor is there a finding, 
based on material, that the punishment is in “outrageous” 
defiance of logic. Neither Wednesbury nor CCSU tests are 
satisfied. We have still to explain “Ranjit Thakur [(1987) 
4 SCC 611 : 1987 SCC (L&S) 1 : (1987) 5 ATC 113] ”.
33. In Ranjit Thakur [(1987) 4 SCC 611 : 1987 SCC 
(L&S) 1 : (1987) 5 ATC 113] this Court interfered with the 
punishment only after coming to the conclusion that the 
punishment was in outrageous defiance of logic and was 
shocking. It was also described as perverse and irrational. 
In other words, this Court felt that, on facts, Wednesbury 
and CCSU tests were satisfied. In another case, in B.C. 
Chaturvedi v. Union of India [(1995) 6 SCC 749 : 1996 
SCC (L&S) 80 : (1996) 32 ATC 44] a three-Judge Bench 
said the same thing as follows……….
34. In such a situation, unless the court/tribunal opines in its 
secondary role, that the administrator was, on the material 
before him, irrational according to Wednesbury [(1948) 1 
KB 223 : (1947) 2 All ER 680] or CCSU [1985 AC 374 : 
(1984) 3 All ER 935] norms, the punishment cannot be 
quashed. Even then, the matter has to be remitted back 
to the appropriate authority for reconsideration. It is only 
in very rare cases as pointed out in B.C. Chaturvedi case 
[AIR 1961 SC 418 : (1961) 2 SCR 343] that the Court 
might — to shorten litigation — think of substituting its 
own view as to the quantum of punishment in the place 
of the punishment awarded by the competent authority. (In 
B.C. Chaturvedi [AIR 1961 SC 418 : (1961) 2 SCR 343] 
and other cases referred to therein it has however been 
made clear that the power of this Court under Article 136 
is different.) For the reasons given above, the case cited 
for the respondent, namely, State of Maharashtra v. M.H. 
Mazumdar [(1988) 2 SCC 52: 1988 SCC (L&S) 436  : 
(1988) 6 ATC 876] cannot be of any help.
35. For the aforesaid reasons, we set aside the order 
of the Tribunal which has interfered with the quantum 
of punishment and which has also substituted its own 

360
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
view of the punishment. The punishment awarded by the 
departmental authorities is restored. In the circumstances, 
there will be no order as to costs.
(emphasis ours)
e.	
Om Kumar v. Union of India14:
67. But where an administrative action is challenged 
as “arbitrary” under Article 14 on the basis of Royappa 
[(1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 165] (as in cases 
where punishments in disciplinary cases are challenged), 
the question will be whether the administrative order 
is “rational” or “reasonable” and the test then is the 
Wednesbury test. The courts would then be confined only 
to a secondary role and will only have to see whether 
the administrator has done well in his primary role, 
whether he has acted illegally or has omitted relevant 
factors from consideration or has taken irrelevant factors 
into consideration or whether his view is one which no 
reasonable person could have taken. If his action does 
not satisfy these rules, it is to be treated as arbitrary. [In 
G.B. Mahajan v. Jalgaon Municipal Council [(1991) 3 SCC 
91] (SCC at p. 111).] Venkatachaliah, J. (as he then was) 
pointed out that “reasonableness” of the administrator 
under Article 14 in the context of administrative law has 
to be judged from the stand point of Wednesbury rules. In 
Tata Cellular v. Union of India [(1994) 6 SCC 651] (SCC 
at pp. 679-80), Indian Express Newspapers Bombay (P) 
Ltd. v. Union of India [(1985) 1 SCC 641 : 1985 SCC 
(Tax) 121] (SCC at p. 691), Supreme Court Employees’ 
Welfare Assn. v. Union of India [(1989) 4 SCC 187 : 
1989 SCC (L&S) 569] (SCC at p. 241) and U.P. Financial 
Corpn. v. Gem Cap (India) (P). Ltd. [(1993) 2 SCC 299] 
(SCC at p. 307) while judging whether the administrative 
action is “arbitrary” under Article 14 (i.e. otherwise then 
being discriminatory), this Court has confined itself to a 
Wednesbury review always.
14	
(2001) 2 SCC 386

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
361
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
68. Thus, when administrative action is attacked as 
discriminatory under Article 14, the principle of primary 
review is for the courts by applying proportionality. However, 
where administrative action is questioned as “arbitrary” 
under Article 14, the principle of secondary review based 
on Wednesbury principles applies.
Proportionality and punishments in service law
69. The principles explained in the last preceding paragraph 
in respect of Article 14 are now to be applied here where 
the question of “arbitrariness” of the order of punishment 
is questioned under Article 14.
70. In this context, we shall only refer to these cases. In 
Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India [(1987) 4 SCC 611 : 1988 
SCC (L&S) 1] this Court referred to “proportionality” in 
the quantum of punishment but the Court observed that 
the punishment was “shockingly” disproportionate to the 
misconduct proved. In B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India 
[(1995) 6 SCC 749 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 80 : (1996) 32 ATC 
44] this Court stated that the court will not interfere unless 
the punishment awarded was one which shocked the 
conscience of the court. Even then, the court would remit 
the matter back to the authority and would not normally 
substitute one punishment for the other. However, in rare 
situations, the court could award an alternative penalty. 
It was also so stated in Ganayutham [(1997) 7 SCC 463 
: 1997 SCC (L&S) 1806].
(emphasis ours)
f.	
Union of India v. R.K. Sharma15: 
13. In our view, the observations in Ranjit Thakur case 
[(1987) 4 SCC 611 : 1988 SCC (L&S) 1 : (1987) 5 ATC 
113] extracted above, have been misunderstood. In that 
case the facts were such that they disclosed a bias on 
the part of the Commanding Officer. In that case the 
appellant Ranjit Thakur had fallen out of favour of the 
15	
(2001) 9 SCC 592

362
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Commanding Officer because he had complained against 
the Commanding Officer. For making such a complaint 
the Commanding Officer had sentenced him to 28 days› 
rigorous imprisonment. While he was serving the sentence 
he was served with another charge-sheet which read as 
follows:
“Accused 1429055-M Signalman Ranjit Thakur of 4 
Corps Operating Signal Regiment is charged with—
Army Act,
Section 41(2).
In that he,
Disobeying a lawful command given 
by his superior officer
at 1530 hours on 29-5-1985 when ordered by JC 
106251-P Sub Ram Singh, the Orderly Officer of 
the same Regiment to eat his food, did not do so.”
On such a ridiculous charge rigorous imprisonment of one 
year was imposed. He was then dismissed from service, 
with the added disqualification of being declared unfit for 
any future civil employment. It was on such gross facts 
that this Court made the observations quoted above and 
held that the punishment was so strikingly disproportionate 
that it called for interference. The above observations are 
not to be taken to mean that a court can, while exercising 
powers under Article 226 or 227 and/or under Article 32, 
interfere with the punishment because it considers the 
punishment to be disproportionate. It is only in extreme 
cases, which on their face show perversity or irrationality 
that there can be judicial review. Merely on compassionate 
grounds a court should not interfere.
(emphasis ours)
g.	
Chairman and Managing Director, United Commercial 
Bank v. P.C. Kakkar16 :
11. The common thread running through in all these 
decisions is that the court should not interfere with the 
16	
(2003) 4 SCC 364

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
363
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
administrator’s decision unless it was illogical or suffers 
from procedural impropriety or was shocking to the 
conscience of the court, in the sense that it was in defiance 
of logic or moral standards. In view of what has been 
stated in Wednesbury case [Associated Provincial Picture 
Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corpn., (1948) 1 KB 223 : 
(1947) 2 All ER 680 (CA)] the court would not go into the 
correctness of the choice made by the administrator open 
to him and the court should not substitute its decision to 
that of the administrator. The scope of judicial review is 
limited to the deficiency in decision-making process and 
not the decision.
12. To put it differently, unless the punishment imposed 
by the disciplinary authority or the Appellate Authority 
shocks the conscience of the court/tribunal, there is no 
scope for interference. Further, to shorten litigation it 
may, in exceptional and rare cases, impose appropriate 
punishment by recording cogent reasons in support 
thereof. In the normal course if the punishment imposed 
is shockingly disproportionate it would be appropriate to 
direct the disciplinary authority or the Appellate Authority 
to reconsider the penalty imposed.
(emphasis ours)
h.	
State of Gujarat v. Anand Acharya17 :
15. The well-settled proposition of law that a court sitting 
in judicial review against the quantum of punishment 
imposed in the disciplinary proceedings will not normally 
substitute its own conclusion on penalty is not in dispute. 
However, if the punishment imposed by the disciplinary 
authority or the Appellate Authority shocks the conscience 
of the court, then the court would appropriately mould 
the relief either by directing the disciplinary/appropriate 
authority to reconsider the penalty imposed or to shorten 
the litigation it may make an exception in rare cases and 
impose appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in 
17	
(2007) 9 SCC 310

364
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
support thereof (see Bhagat Ram v. State of H.P. [(1983) 
2 SCC 442 : 1983 SCC (L&S) 342] , Ranjit Thakur v. 
Union of India [(1987) 4 SCC 611 : 1988 SCC (L&S) 1] 
and U.P. SRTC v. Mahesh Kumar Mishra [(2000) 3 SCC 
450 : 2000 SCC (L&S) 356]).
i.	
S.R. Tewari v. Union of India18 : 
28. The role of the court in the matter of departmental 
proceedings is very limited and the court cannot substitute 
its own views or findings by replacing the findings arrived 
at by the authority on detailed appreciation of the evidence 
on record. In the matter of imposition of sentence, the 
scope for interference by the court is very limited and 
restricted to exceptional cases. The punishment imposed 
by the disciplinary authority or the appellate authority 
unless shocking to the conscience of the court, cannot be 
subjected to judicial review. The court has to record reasons 
as to why the punishment is disproportionate. Failure 
to give reasons amounts to denial of justice. The mere 
statement that it is disproportionate would not suffice. …
(emphasis ours)
j.	
Rajasthan SRTC v Bajrang Lal19 : 
21. As regards the question of disproportionate punishment 
is concerned, the issue is no more res integra. …
22. In view of the above, the contention raised on behalf of 
the respondent employee, that the punishment of removal 
from service is disproportionate to the delinquency is not 
worth acceptance. The only punishment in case of the 
proved case of corruption is dismissal from service.
(emphasis ours)
9.	
What follows from the precedents noted above is that courts should 
exercise restraint while interdicting orders of punishment. Normally, 
no court in exercise of its power of judicial review should interfere 
18	
(2013) 6 SCC 602 
19	
(2014) 8 SCC 693

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
365
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
with an order of punishment imposed on a delinquent as a measure 
of disciplinary action by the competent authority and substitute its 
own judgment for that of the former. This is premised on the reason 
that the disciplinary authority is the best judge of the situation, and 
the requirements of maintaining discipline within the work force. 
While it is not the law that the courts should invariably stay at a 
distance when legality and/or propriety of a particular punishment 
is questioned, judicial scrutiny of the disciplinary action by way of 
punishment could arise only if the circumstances are such that no 
reasonable person would impose the punishment which is questioned 
and/or such punishment has the effect of shocking the conscience of 
the court. To put in simpler words, interference could be warranted 
if it appeals to the court that the disciplinary authority has ‘used a 
sledgehammer for cracking a nut’. A punishment, which is strikingly 
or shockingly disproportionate and is not commensurate with the 
gravity of misconduct, proved to have been committed in course 
of inquiry or otherwise, would border on arbitrariness and offend 
Article 14 of the Constitution. 
10.	 Where a court, upon due consideration, arrives at the conclusion 
that the punishment imposed is disproportionate, its intervention 
is circumscribed in nature. Judicial scrutiny and interference, if at 
all, has to be based on reasons in support of the court’s ultimate 
satisfaction that the disciplinary authority has faltered in the exercise 
of his discretion. In such a situation, the court may adopt one of 
two courses: it may remit the matter to the competent authority 
for reconsideration of the punishment; or, in the rarest of cases, it 
may substitute the punishment while supporting such a course with 
cogent reasons.
11.	 After refreshing our memory with these well-established principles, the 
only question that arises for consideration is whether interference by 
the Single Judge with the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority, 
in the facts and circumstances of the present case, satisfied the 
requisite threshold. If we find that such interference was not called 
for, then the impugned order (which upheld the view taken by the 
Single Judge) will have to be set aside.
12.	 Whether the imposition of lighter punishment on the co-delinquents 
while imposing the punishment of ‘dismissal from service’ upon the 
respondent is in outright defiance of logic? We think not. 

366
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
13.	 Sight cannot be lost of the fact that the respondent, when he committed 
the offence, was holding the post of “Senior Manager in MMGS-III 
Scale”, which is obviously much higher than the co-delinquents (officer 
and gunman). Authority carries accountability; higher the authority, 
higher the accountability. The rank of the respondent was not merely 
titular; it carried with it an increased degree of responsibility and 
integrity. The role of the respondent not only necessitated personal 
obedience but also supervision of the actions of the subordinates. The 
co-delinquents, having limited powers and authority, could not have 
been equated with the respondent. The gravity of the misconduct 
necessarily had to be measured with the nature of the misconduct. 
Thus, grant of the benefit of parity to the respondent by the High Court 
merely because the co-delinquents were given lighter punishment 
was entirely misconceived. The differentiation in rank coupled with 
the increased trust of the employer on the respondent certainly 
constituted a compelling ground for a more stringent punishment to 
be imposed on him. 
14.	 Taking an overall view, the fact that the disciplinary authority found 
it prudent in the circumstances to impose a harsher punishment 
on a higher-ranking official is neither disproportionate, nor shocks 
our conscience. The High Court clearly fell in error in the course of 
adjudication of the lis.
15.	 Quite apart, equating a branch manager of a bank with its gunman 
seems to us to be in outrageous defiance of logic and reason. This 
is not a case akin to Sengara Singh v. State of Punjab20 where this 
Court interfered with disciplinary action finding that some out of several, 
guilty of the same misconduct, were picked and chosen for harsher 
punishment leaving aside others without any convincing reason. 
16.	 Reference to the observation made by the Division Bench, noted in 
paragraph 4 supra, is of no real consequence. Manifest as it is, the 
Division Bench while remanding the writ petition for a fresh decision 
recorded only a prima facie finding that the respondent might have 
been pressurized to make deposit of a portion of the misappropriated 
amount. Even the Single Judge, on remand, did not finally record 
similar such finding to rule in favour of the respondent. The argument 
made in desperation to salvage the situation is, thus, rejected.
20	
(1983) 4 SCC 225

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
367
Punjab & Sind Bank v. Sh. Raj Kumar
17.	 Considering the facts of the present case, we do not find any perversity 
or irrationality with the punishment imposed. We have, therefore, 
reached the irresistible conclusion that interference by the Single 
Judge with the decision of the disciplinary authority, since affirmed 
by the Division Bench vide the impugned order, was uncalled for.
18.	 Thus, the impugned order (upholding the order of the Single Judge) 
is set aside together with the order that it upheld. The punishment 
imposed by the disciplinary authority (namely, dismissal from service) 
imposed on the respondent is restored. 
19.	 The appeal is allowed on the aforesaid terms. 
20.	 Parties shall, however, bear their own costs. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
