[2026] 4 S.C.R. 565 : 2026 INSC 355
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors.
v.
The State of Maharashtra
(Criminal Appeal No. 1893 of 2026)
10 April 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari* and Atul S. Chandurkar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Appellants are entitled to the benefit of ss.3 and 4 
of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, and if so, to what extent; 
whether the benefit of s.4 of the 1958 Act is available to an offender 
who has been sentenced only with payment of fine, and not to 
any term of imprisonment.
Headnotes†
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 – ss.3, 4 – Power of court to 
release certain offenders after admonition or on probation of 
good conduct – Penal Code, 1860 – s.53 – Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita (BNS), 2023 – s.4 – Benefit of ss.3 and 4, 1958 Act – 
Entitlement to – Appellants were convicted u/ss.323 and 324 
r/w s.34, IPC and sentenced to pay a fine of only Rs.500/- and 
Rs.2000/- – If entitled to the benefit of ss.3 and 4 – Respondent-
State objected to extending the benefit contending that the 
expression used ‘release of the offender’ in s.4 has some 
significance and since, the Appellants were not sentenced 
of imprisonment but were fined, therefore, passing an order 
of release in this case is not possible:
Held: For an offender, the punishments may include the death, 
imprisonment for life, imprisonment, forfeiture of property, fine and 
community service in terms of the recent addition in BNS – Since 
ss.3 and 4 govern acts committed by an offender in relation to 
the specific punishments prescribed under the IPC, BNS and any 
other law, these provisions must naturally extend to sentences 
including fine – Therefore, any reference to ‘punishment’ in 1958 
Act has to be construed as per enumeration contained in s.53 
of IPC and s.4 of BNS and should undoubtedly include ‘fine’ as 
well – Plea of the State that s.4 of 1958 Act is inapplicable in case 
* Author

566
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
sentence consist solely of a fine, is devoid of merit – Benefit of 
s.4 is available to an offender who has been sentenced only to 
payment of fine – Furthermore, the expression ‘release’ used in 
s.4 cannot mean release only from custody – It has to be read 
as releasing from the obligation to serve sentence of payment of 
fine – Therefore, ‘release’ as contained in s.4 of 1958 Act should 
be read as to set the offender at liberty from receiving sentence, 
even of fine only – Appellants were convicted u/s.323 and 324 
of IPC and the allegations as proved relate to assault upon the 
persons belonging to same locality – They were sentenced to pay 
a fine of only Rs. 500/- u/s.323 and Rs. 2000/- u/s.324 of IPC, 
no imprisonment was awarded – There is no subsequent or prior 
involvement of the Appellants in commission of any offence, only 
present criminal case has been registered against them – They 
are employed with State Government – Appellants have not 
committed an offence involving moral turpitude – Benefit of s.3 
and s.4 extended to the Appellants – Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 – s.360. [Paras 24-26, 40-43]
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 – ss.3, 4, 12 – Power of court 
to release certain offenders after admonition – Power of court 
to release certain offenders on probation of good conduct – 
Removal of disqualification attaching to conviction:
Held: Once the benefit either u/s.3 or s. 4 has been granted to an 
offender, it would entail the benefit of removal of disqualification, 
if any, attaching to the conviction – Thus, in case a person has 
been released after admonition u/s.3 or on probation of good 
conduct u/s.4, they shall not face a disqualification attaching to 
such conviction – In the present case, since all the Appellants have 
been extended the benefit u/ss.3 and 4, they shall not incur any 
disqualification affecting their service career, if any, arising out of 
the conviction, in terms of s.12. [Paras 18, 19]
Interpretation of Statutes – Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 – 
A beneficial legislation, to be interpreted in a purposive manner:
Held: 1958 Act is a beneficial legislation, therefore, keeping the 
legislative intent in mind, its provisions ought to be interpreted in 
a purposive manner – If two or more views are possible vis-à-vis 
interpretation of a beneficial legislation, it must be interpreted in 
favour of beneficiaries – Object and purpose of the 1958 Act, 
discussed. [Paras 11, 13]

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
567
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 – ss.3, 4 – Power of court to 
release certain offenders after admonition or on probation of 
good conduct – Relevant factors to be taken into consideration 
while passing orders u/ss.3 and 4. [Paras 36, 39]
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 – ss.3, 4 – Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 – s.360 – Power of court to release certain 
offenders after admonition – Power of court to release certain 
offenders on probation of good conduct – Order to release 
on probation of good conduct or after admonition – Different 
framework of s.360, CrPC vis-à-vis ss.3,4, 1958 Act as regards 
the scope and structure, discussed. [Paras 28, 29, 33]
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 – ss.3, 4 – Benefit of, when 
available to an offender, stated. [Paras 14-19]
Words and Phrases – Expression ‘release’ in s.4, Probation 
of Offenders Act, 1958 – Meaning. [Para 26]
Case Law Cited
Rattan Lal v. State of Punjab [1964] 7 SCR 676 : 1964 SCC 
OnLine SC 40; Ved Prakash v. State of Haryana [1981] 1 SCR 
1279 : (1981) 1 SCC 447; Mohd. Hasim v. State of Uttar Pradesh 
[2016] 9 SCR 953 : (2017) 2 SCC 198; Bharat Singh v. New Delhi 
Tuberculosis Centre [1986] 2 SCR 169 : (1986) 2 SCC 614; Kerala 
Fishermen’s Welfare Fund Board v. Fancy Food [1995] 3 SCR 
785 : (1995) 4 SCC 341; Union of India v. Prabhakaran Vijaya 
Kumar [2008] 7 SCR 673 : (2008) 9 SCC 527; Bombay Anand 
Bhavan Restaurant v. ESI Corpn. [2009] 13 SCR 1139 : (2009) 
9 SCC 61; Sanjay Dutt (A-117) v. State of Maharashtra [2013] 
16 SCR 368 : 2013 SCC OnLine SC 252; Lakhanlal v. State of 
M.P. (2021) 6 SCC 100; State of Maharashtra v. Jagmohan Singh 
Kuldip Singh Anand (2004) 7 SCC 659; Dalbir Singh v. State of 
Haryana [2000] 3 SCR 1000 : (2000) 5 SCC 82 – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
Advanced Law Lexicon – referred to.
List of Acts
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958; Penal Code, 1860; Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973; Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 
2023; Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.

568
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
List of Keywords
Section 3 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958; Section 4 of the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958; Sections 12 of the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958; Release offenders after admonition; Release 
offenders on probation of good conduct; Removal of disqualification 
attaching to conviction; Released after admonition; Released on 
probation of good conduct Offender sentenced only with payment 
of fine; Offenders sentenced with ‘fine only’; Offender sentenced to 
pay fine; No imprisonment awarded; Benefit of Section 4 of 1958 
Act; Offender sentenced only to payment of fine; Only payment of 
fine; Offender not sentenced to any term of imprisonment; ‘release’; 
‘punishment’; ‘fine’; Section 53 of IPC; Section 4 of BNS; Section 
360, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Beneficial legislation; 
Purposive interpretation; Reformative approach.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No(s). 
1893 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 26.02.2024 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay at Aurangabad in CRLA No. 506 of 2023.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Amol B. Karande, Vishal Jogdand, Ashutosh Srivastava, 
Ms. Akshada, B. Lakshmi Pallesh, Rajiv Agnihotri.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha 
Pande, Shrirang B. Varma, Vinayak Aren, Jatin Dhamija, Ms. 
Aiswharya Nigam.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Present appeal is against the final judgment and order dated 
26.02.2024 of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
569
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
Aurangabad (hereinafter, ‘High Court’), in Criminal Appeal No. 506 
of 2023. The High Court upheld the conviction and sentence for the 
charge of Sections 323 and 324 read with Section 34 of the Indian 
Penal Code (hereinafter, ‘IPC’), as determined by the Special Judge 
(POCSO), Beed. The Trial Court, as affirmed by the High Court, 
imposed sentences, whereby Appellant Nos. 1, 2 and 3 (hereinafter, 
‘A-1, A-2 and A-3’ respectively) were each directed to pay a fine 
of Rs. 500/- under Section 323, with default stipulation of 15 days’ 
simple imprisonment; and a fine of Rs. 2000/- under Section 324, 
with default stipulation of one-month simple imprisonment, both 
read with Section 34 of IPC. Appellant No. 4 (hereinafter, ‘A-4’) 
was directed to pay a fine of Rs. 500/- under Section 323 read 
with Section 34 of IPC, with a default stipulation of 15 days’ simple 
imprisonment. The present appeal has been preferred assailing the 
aforesaid findings.
FACTS IN BRIEF
3.	
It is the case of prosecution that the victim, a 17-year-old girl, was 
at her home during Diwali vacation. On 02.11.2019, at around 
8.30 A.M. while she was standing outside her house, the accused 
persons approached her. A-1 grabbed her hand, pressurized her for 
relationship and gave proposal of marriage since her father wasn’t 
agreeing. Upon which she screamed and her grandmother as well as 
sister came out and confronted the Appellants. At that moment, A-2 
assaulted the sister, and A-3 pushed the grandmother. Thereafter, 
the victim informed about the incident to her father at his nearby 
garage. At about 9:30 A.M, all five accused (including one accused 
who was acquitted by the Trial Court) arrived in a white Sumo vehicle 
and attacked the father of the victim. A-2 struck on the head by 
iron tambi, A-1 hit on leg with an iron rod, A-3 beat with a wooden 
stick, A-4 assaulted with fists and kicks, while co-accused Dayabai 
instigated them. During the incident, ₹2,000 fell from the father’s 
pocket. Bystanders rescued him and took the family to the police 
station. The injured father was referred to a Government Hospital. 
An FIR of the incident was registered on 02.11.2019 as Crime No. 
190/2019 under sections 143, 147, 148, 149, 324, 323, 354-A, 504, 
506 of IPC and sections 8 and 12 of POCSO, 2012. Learned Trial 
Court acquitted accused Dayabai for all the charges while other 
accused persons, who are Appellants before us, were acquitted for 
all the charges except as specified in paragraph (2) above. Upon 

570
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
filing appeal, the High Court vide the impugned order dismissed the 
same, hence, the present appeal.
4.	
In this Criminal Appeal, notice was issued vide order dated 
17.05.2024, however, when it was listed on 11.12.2024, learned 
counsel for the Appellants submitted that they do not wish to press 
the appeal on merits and urged to consider benefit of Sections 3 
and 4 read with Sections 12 of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 
(hereinafter, ‘1958 Act’). 
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED
5.	
Mr. Amol B. Karande, learned counsel for the Appellants, has 
contended that present is a fit case to grant benefit of Sections 3 
and 4 read with Section 12 of 1958 Act. In support, reliance was 
placed on Rattan Lal v. State of Punjab1, submitting that 1958 
Act recognizes the reformative theory of punishment and object 
of the penal law is more to reform the individual offender than to 
punish. It has also been said that it is the duty of the sentencing 
court to be activist enough to collect such facts bearing in mind the 
rehabilitative approach, as has been observed in Ved Prakash v. 
State of Haryana2.
6.	
In reference to the fact and looking at the nature of offences, i.e., 
voluntarily causing hurt and voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous 
weapons, it is contended that the Appellants may be released after 
admonition or on probation of good conduct. Placing reliance upon 
the decision of this Court in Mohd. Hasim v. State of Uttar Pradesh3, 
it has been argued that Sections 3 and 4 of the 1958 Act vests 
discretionary power on Court to release a convict on probation of 
good conduct on bond with or without sureties, even at the appellate 
or revisional stage. It is further argued that the word ‘expedient’ used 
in Sections 3 and 4 ought to be construed in its widest amplitude 
to mean what is apt, suitable, and appropriate to the end in view. 
In the facts and circumstances of the present case, releasing the 
Appellants on a bond of good conduct would be entirely consistent 
with the letter and the spirit of the enactment. As such Appellants 
1	
1964 SCC OnLine SC 40
2	
(1981) 1 SCC 447
3	
(2017) 2 SCC 198

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
571
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
may be released after admonition or on probation on bond with or 
without sureties as may be deemed fit.
7.	
Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the State submitted that 
the conviction and sentence imposed by the Trial Court, as confirmed 
up to the High Court vide impugned judgment does not warrant 
interference. The benefit of the 1958 Act is being sought mainly on 
the ground that it may cause prejudice in employment to A-1 and A-4 
who are in government service, rather than on any genuine merits 
warranting probation. 
8.	
It has further been contended with respect to applicability of Section 
3 that the A-4, who has been sentenced under Section 323 IPC only 
may be benefitted. A-1, A-2 and A-3, who stand convicted under 
Section 324 IPC fall outside the scope of benefit under Section 3, 
as claimed. It has been vehemently argued that the true import and 
object of Section 4 is to spare an offender from incarceration and 
shield them from the deleterious effects of jail life, postponing the 
receiving of sentence for a period not exceeding three years; unlike 
Section 3, which expunges the imprisonment itself. Since A-1, A-2 
and A-3 have been sentenced only for payment of fine and not to 
any term of imprisonment, the very premise underlying Section 4 
is absent in this case. Therefore, it has been urged, the prayer for 
probation qua A-1, A-2 and A-3 is wholly unjustified and liable to be 
rejected at threshold.
ANALYSIS
9.	
In light of the arguments advanced and, in the facts of the present 
case, issues that fall for our consideration are - (i) Whether the 
Appellants are entitled to the benefit of Sections 3 and 4 of the 1958 
Act, and if so, to what extent?; (ii) Whether the benefit of Section 4 
of the 1958 Act is available to an offender who has been sentenced 
only with payment of fine, and not to any term of imprisonment?
10.	 Since the Appellants have pressed this appeal limited to the grant of 
benefit under the 1958 Act, therefore, to understand the intent of the 
provisions of the said Act and the extent to which it may be allowed 
to an offender who requires to be punished, including by way of fine 
only, both the issues are dealt with simultaneously and in reference 
to the provisions of the 1958 Act, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (hereinafter, ‘CrPC’), the Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 

572
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2023 (hereinafter, ‘BNSS’), the IPC and the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023 (hereinafter, ‘BNS’). 
11.	 At the outset, it is required to be noted that 1958 Act is a beneficial 
legislation, therefore, keeping the legislative intent in mind, its 
provisions ought to be interpreted in a purposive manner. It is trite 
law that if two or more views are possible vis-a-vis interpretation of a 
beneficial legislation, it must be interpreted in favour of beneficiaries.4 
The objects clause of the 1958 Act declares the act to provide for 
the release of offenders on probation or after due admonition and 
the matters connected therewith. While introducing the Probation 
of Offenders Bill, 1957 to the Lok Sabha on 14.11.1957, the then 
Minister of State for Home Affairs remarked as follows –
“On a number of occasions, the Inspector-General of 
Prisons in the various States have met. From 1925 onwards 
there were a number of meetings and the Inspectors-
General who are in close touch with the life of the convict 
behind the prison bars found that oftentimes the particular 
rigour to which the convict has been subjected or the life 
that he leads there produces certain results other than 
those expected. The expected result would be that the 
man must reform himself, and that after he comes out 
of the jail, he ought to lead a reformed life, he ought to 
return to the proper or social life to which every citizen 
has to confine himself. But oftentimes on account of 
the long period behind the prison bars, the man does 
not improve; on the other hand, he shows certain sign 
of deterioration or worse results. That was the reason 
why it was considered necessary that the question of 
prison reform or the question of the reform of the convict 
or the prisoner ought to be considered not only from the 
point of view of the administration as such, not only from 
the point of view of its having a deterrent effect upon him, 
but also from the point of view of improving this particular 
man, namely the convict.
4	
See, Bharat Singh v. New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre, (1986) 2 SCC 614; Kerala Fishermen’s Welfare 
Fund Board v. Fancy Food, (1995) 4 SCC 341; Union of India v. Prabhakaran Vijaya Kumar, (2008) 9 
SCC 527; Bombay Anand Bhavan Restaurant v. ESI Corpn., (2009) 9 SCC 61

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
573
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
The principle that is followed in this connection is 
that a man becomes a criminal on account of certain 
circumstances or on account of certain tendencies, 
which are anti-social and which are criminal, so far 
as he is concerned. So the way to reform him and 
to bring him back to human standards is to find out 
certain items of reform by means of which he would 
become a good man, and after some time, he would 
become a better man.
These are two standards that we have taken into account.”
12.	 After introduction in the Lok Sabha, it was referred to the Joint 
Committee on 18.11.1957. Similarly, Rajya Sabha also agreed to 
said reference to the Joint Committee on 26.11.1957. The Joint 
Committee prepared its report on 19.2.1958 and the bill was again 
discussed in the Lok Sabha on 26.04.1958. In the opening statement, 
the then Dy. Minister of Home Affairs reflected upon the objectives 
of the act in following words –
“…..Therefore we feel that if we have such good human 
material inside the prison, we should give this human 
material every opportunity to rehabilitate itself in 
society without the stigma of conviction and prison 
term……..
……To avoid this stigma, we want to try out this most 
progressive measure in the country and see that the men 
and women who become offenders for the first time or 
even offenders for the second or the third time, as we call 
them hopeless, are given an opportunity……..
……The meaning of probation is suspended sentence. 
Suspended sentence means that he will be left in 
society under the guidance and care of a probation 
officer or of a surety or of such other agent who would 
be able to look after him and assist him and see that 
he behaves well and is able once again to become 
what we call a good citizen……..
…..We are only trying to rehabilitate those many hundreds 
and hundreds of offenders who because of, may be, 
socio-economic considerations or other stringencies, or 

574
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
may be, their mental make-up, commit certain offences. 
Therefore, we have certain sections of the Indian Penal 
Code only in which probation would be permitted to be 
granted by courts…..” 
13.	 From the above, it can safely be gathered that the object and 
purpose of the 1958 Act is to rehabilitate offenders and make an 
attempt to reintegrate them into the mainstream of the society as 
reformed citizens, rather than to punish for their delinquent actions. 
What weighed in the mind of the law makers was that crime is, more 
often than not, a product of numerous socio-economic circumstances 
and that punishment may in fact lead to further deterioration of 
his character. In other words, the 1958 Act seeks to harmonize 
deterrence and reformation while empowering the courts to release 
the offenders after admonition or on probation of good conduct under 
supervision of the probation officer. It saves the offenders from the 
stigma of conviction as well as imprisonment and affords them an 
opportunity to return to the social life with dignity. In light of the above 
discussion, the 1958 Act requires purposive interpretation keeping 
in mind its objectives.
14.	 Since the main argument of the Appellants is canvassed for the 
benefit of 1958 Act, in particular Sections 3 and 4, we will deal with 
the provisions empowering the Courts either to release the offender 
after admonition or on probation of good conduct. To understand 
the situations in which the benefit of Sections 3 and 4 of the 1958 
Act can be made available to an offender, it is necessary to refer to 
those provisions hereunder:
“3. Power of court to release certain offenders after 
admonition. — When any person is found guilty of having 
committed an offence punishable under Section 379 or 
Section 380 or Section 381 or Section 404 or Section 
420 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or any offence 
punishable with imprisonment for not more than two years, 
or with fine, or with both, under the Indian Penal Code or 
any other law, and no previous conviction is proved against 
him and the court by which the person is found guilty is of 
opinion that, having regard to the circumstances of the case 
including the nature of the offence and the character of 
the offender, it is expedient so to do, then, notwithstanding 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
575
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the court may, instead of sentencing him to any 
punishment or releasing him on probation of good conduct 
under Section 4, release him after due admonition.
Explanation – For the purposes of this section, previous 
conviction against a person shall include any previous 
order made against him under this section or section 4.”
Upon reading of Section 3, it is apparent that benefit thereof can be 
granted only when offender is found guilty of committing the offence 
as specified therein or any offence punishable with not more than two 
years or fine or both under IPC or any other law and such offender 
does not have any antecedents of previous conviction. In the said 
contingencies, if the Court is of the opinion that looking to the nature 
of offence, circumstances and the character of offender, it is expedient 
to do so, it may pass an order of release after admonition, instead 
of sentencing or passing an order under Section 4.
15.	 Similarly, Section 4 deals with the cases of those offenders, who 
can be released on probation of good conduct. For ready reference, 
it is reproduced as thus:
“4. Power of court to release certain offenders on 
probation of good conduct. — 
(1) When any person is found guilty of having committed 
an offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life and the court by which the person is found guilty is 
of opinion that, having regard to the circumstances of the 
case including the nature of the offence and the character 
of the offender, it is expedient to release him on probation 
of good conduct, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law for the time being in force, the court may, 
instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, 
direct that he be released on his entering into a bond, 
with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence 
when called upon during such period, not exceeding three 
years, as the court may direct, and in the meantime to 
keep the peace and be of good behaviour:
Provided that the court shall not direct such release of an 
offender unless it is satisfied that the offender or his surety, 

576
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
if any, has a fixed place of abode or a regular occupation 
in the place over which the court exercises jurisdiction or 
in which the offender is likely to reside during the period 
of the bond.
(2) Before making any order under sub-section (1), the 
court shall take into consideration the report, if any, of the 
probation officer concerned in relation to the case.
(3) When an order is made under this section, the court 
may, if it is of opinion that in the interests of the offender 
and of the public it is expedient so to do, in addition, pass 
a supervision order directing that the offender shall remain 
under the supervision of a probation officer named in the 
order during such period, not being less than one year, 
as may be specified therein, and may require the offender 
to comply with such conditions as may be specified in the 
supervision order.
(4) The court making a supervision order under sub-section 
(3) shall require the offender, before releasing him, to 
enter into a bond, with or without sureties, to observe the 
conditions of the supervision order and such additional 
conditions with respect to residence, abstention from 
intoxicants or any other matter as the court having regard 
to the particular circumstances of the case may think fit to 
impose for preventing a repetition of the same offence or 
a commission of other offences by the offender.
(5) The court making a supervision order under sub-section 
(3) shall explain to the offender the terms and conditions 
of the order and shall forthwith furnish one copy of the 
supervision order to each of the offenders, the sureties, 
if any, and the probation officer concerned.”
16.	 A perusal of the above makes it clear that if a person is found guilty of 
an offence which is not punishable with either death or imprisonment 
for life and the Court, having regard to the circumstances of the case 
which includes nature of the offence and the character of the offender, 
is of the opinion that it is expedient to do so, notwithstanding any 
other law for the time being in force, instead of sentencing at once 
of any punishment for such offence, the accused may be released 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
577
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
on furnishing the bond, with or without sureties. It is also prescribed 
that the Court may direct him to appear and receive the sentence 
during such period when called upon, which may not exceed three 
years. In the meantime, such person has to keep peace and be of 
good behaviour. It is clarified that such an order ought to be passed 
by the Court only after recording satisfaction regarding place of stay 
of the offender or his surety or about the regular occupation in the 
place where the court exercises jurisdiction or at a place where the 
offender may likely reside during period of bond. The Court should 
also take into consideration the report of the probation officer while 
passing such order, if such report is available. An order of supervision 
can also be passed by the Court, if it is of the opinion that such an 
order will be in the interest of the offender and of the public, directing 
the offender to remain under the supervision of a probation officer 
named in the order during period, which shall not be less than one 
year. The condition, if any, imposed by the Court, is required to 
be complied with by the offender, as prescribed in the supervision 
order. The offender is required to enter into a bond, with or without 
sureties, and to observe the conditions as contained hereinabove 
and such additional conditions with respect to residence, abstention 
from intoxicants or any other matter which the Court may think 
fit to impose for preventing a repetition of the same offence or a 
commission of other offences by the offender. The conditions, as 
imposed for supervision and circumstances as indicated in the order 
has to be explained to the offender and a copy of such order has 
to be furnished to each offender, sureties and the probation officer. 
17.	 At this stage, it is necessary to make it clear that under Section 3, 
a convict can be released by the Court after admonition only with 
respect to offences as specified therein. On the other hand, while 
exercising the power under Section 4, the Court may release the 
offender on probation of good conduct with respect to the offences 
as prescribed. 
18.	 It is not out of place to specify that in context of the object and reasons 
for which the 1958 Act was brought, powers have been conferred 
upon the Court primarily under Sections 3 and 4. As contemplated 
under Section 11, the Courts are competent to make such orders 
even during appeal and revision. Further, once the benefit either 
under Section 3 or Section 4 has been granted to such offender, it 
would entail the benefit of removal of disqualification, if any, attaching 

578
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to the conviction. Therefore, Section 12, in this regard, is relevant, 
which is reproduced as thus:
“12. Removal of disqualification attaching to 
conviction. — Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law, a person who has been released on probation 
of good conduct under Section 4 or after admonition under 
Section 3 shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attaching 
to a conviction of an offence under such law:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person 
who, after his release, is sentenced to imprisonment for the 
commission of the original offence or of any other offence.”
19.	 On perusal, it is quite clear that in case a person has been released 
after admonition under Section 3 or on probation of good conduct 
under Section 4, they shall not face a disqualification attaching to 
such conviction. 
20.	 Learned counsel for the Respondents vociferously objected to 
extending the benefit of 1958 Act to A-1, A-2 and A-3 who have 
been convicted for the charge of Section 324 IPC, in addition to the 
charge of Section 323 IPC. It is contended that in Section 4 of the 
1958 Act, the expression used ‘release of the offender’ has some 
significance and in the case at hand, the Appellants have not been 
sentenced of imprisonment but were fined, therefore, passing an 
order of release in this case is not possible.
21.	 The said argument was countered by the Appellants, referring to 
Section 53 of IPC and Section 4 of BNS, wherein fine has been 
included within the connotation ‘punishment’ along with other 
categories of punishment including imprisonment. The applicability of 
Section 4 of 1958 Act is with respect to the offences not punishable 
with death or life imprisonment, therefore barring the sentence 
of death and life imprisonment, in case the punishment, if any, 
including the fine has been awarded, the release order can be 
passed by the Court under Section 4 of 1958 Act even in case of 
fine.
22.	 Having considered the contentions as advanced and to appreciate 
them, it would be necessary to refer to Section 53 of IPC and 
corresponding provisions of Section 4 of BNS. Both the Sections 
are reproduced hereunder in tabular form for comparison –

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
579
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
Section 53 of IPC
Section 4 of BNS
53. Punishments. — The 
punishments to which offenders 
are liable under the provisions of 
this Code are —
First – Death;
Secondly – Imprisonment for life;
Thirdly – [Omitted by Act 26 of 
1955, s. 117 and Sch.];
Fourthly – Imprisonment, which 
is of two descriptions, namely: -
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard 
labour;
(2) Simple;
Fifthly – Forfeiture of property;
Sixthly – Fine.
4. Punishments. — The 
punishments to which offenders 
are liable under the provisions 
of this Sanhita are — 
(a) Death; 
(b) Imprisonment for life; 
(c) Imprisonment, which is of 
two descriptions, namely:— 
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard 
labour; 
(2) Simple; 
(d) Forfeiture of property; 
(e) Fine; 
(f) Community Service.
23.	 In view of the above, it is clear that Section 53 of IPC has been 
adopted as it is in Section 4 of BNS while also adding another 
punishment in nature of community service. This is also indicative 
of the paradigm shift in the legislative intent from deterrence to 
reformation which has been reaffirmed while prescribing the mode 
of punishment in BNS. 
24.	 In view of the above, it is a clear that for an offender, the punishments 
may include the death, imprisonment for life, imprisonment 
(rigorous with hard labour or simple), forfeiture of property, fine and 
community service in terms of the recent addition in BNS. Since 
Sections 3 and 4 of the 1958 Act govern acts committed by an 
offender in relation to the specific punishments prescribed under 
the IPC, BNS and any other law, these provisions must naturally 
extend to sentences including fine. Consequently, the argument 
advanced by the learned counsel for the State that Section 4 is 
inapplicable in case sentence consist solely of a fine, is entirely 
devoid of merit.

580
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
25.	 Therefore, any reference to ‘punishment’ in 1958 Act has to be 
construed as per enumeration contained in Section 53 of IPC and 
Section 4 of BNS and should undoubtedly include ‘fine’ as well. From 
the above discussion, it is luculent that, the benefit of Section 4 of 
the 1958 Act is available to an offender who has been sentenced 
only to payment of fine.
26.	 During course of arguments, much emphasis was laid by the Counsel 
for the State that Section 4 uses the expression ‘release’ in context of 
‘instead of sentencing’ and thus, when the person is sentenced only 
for fine and not for imprisonment, there is no occasion for the Court 
to ‘release’ him, thereby making application of Section 4 of 1958 Act 
impossible. In light of the discussion in the preceding paragraphs, 
the expression ‘release’ has to be read accordingly. In this context, 
we are of the opinion that ‘release’ cannot mean release only from 
custody. It has to be read as releasing from the obligation to serve 
sentence of payment of fine. This view is further strengthened by 
the meaning of the word ‘release’ as contained in Advanced Law 
Lexicon5. It is defined, inter-alia, as ‘to set at liberty’. Therefore, 
‘release’ as contained in Section 4 of 1958 Act should be read as to 
set the offender at liberty from receiving sentence, even of fine only. 
27.	 In addition to the provisions as contained under the 1958 Act, the 
CrPC also confers powers upon the Court to make an order of 
release on probation of good conduct or after admonition as per 
Section 3606. The said provision is reproduced as thus –
“360. Order to release on probation of good conduct 
or after admonition. — 
(1) When any person not under twenty-one years of age 
is convicted of an offence punishable with fine only or 
with imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or 
when any person under twenty-one years of age or any 
woman is convicted of an offence not punishable with 
death or imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction 
is proved against the offender, if it appears to the Court 
before which he is convicted, regard being had to the 
5	
P Ramanatha Aiyar, Advanced Law Lexicon, Pg. 4037 (3rd Edition, 2005, Wadhwa Nagpur)
6	
Section 401 of BNSS is corresponding provision.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
581
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to 
the circumstances in which the offence was committed, 
that it is expedient that the offender should be released 
on probation of good conduct, the Court may, instead of 
sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that he 
be released on his entering into a bond, with or without 
sureties, to appear and receive sentence when called 
upon during such period (not exceeding three years) as 
the Court may direct, and in the meantime to keep the 
peace and be of good behaviour: 
Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a 
Magistrate of the second class not specially empowered 
by the High Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that 
the powers conferred by this section should be exercised, 
he shall record his opinion to that effect, and submit the 
proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class, forwarding 
the accused to, or taking bail for his appearance before, 
such Magistrate, who shall dispose of the case in the 
manner provided by sub-section (2). 
(2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate 
of the first class as provided by sub-section (1), such 
Magistrate may thereupon pass such sentence or make 
such order as he might have passed or made if the case 
had originally been heard by him, and, if he thinks further 
inquiry or additional evidence on any point to be necessary, 
he may make such inquiry or take such evidence himself 
or direct such inquiry or evidence to be made or taken. 
(3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, 
theft in a building, dishonest misappropriation, cheating 
or any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
punishable with not more than two years, imprisonment 
or any offence punishable with fine only and no previous 
conviction is proved against him, the Court before which 
he is so convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to 
the age, character, antecedents or physical or mental 
condition of the offender and to the trivial nature of the 
offence or any extenuating circumstances under which the 
offence was committed, instead of sentencing him to any 
punishment, release him after due admonition.

582
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(4) An order under this section may be made by any 
Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of Session 
when exercising its powers of revision. 
(5) When an order has been made under this section in 
respect of any offender, the High Court or Court of Session 
may, on appeal when there is a right of appeal to such 
Court, or when exercising its powers of revision, set aside 
such order, and in lieu thereof pass sentence on such 
offender according to law: Provided that the High Court 
or Court of Session shall not under this sub-section inflict 
a greater punishment than might have been inflicted by 
the Court by which the offender was convicted. 
(6) The provisions of sections 121, 124 and 373 shall, 
so far as may be, apply in the case of sureties offered in 
pursuance of the provisions of this section. 
(7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender 
under sub-section (1), shall be satisfied that an offender 
or his surety (if any) has a fixed place of abode or regular 
occupation in the place for which the Court acts or in which 
the offender is likely to live during the period named for 
the observance of the conditions. 
(8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court 
which could have dealt with the offender in respect of his 
original offence, is satisfied that the offender has failed to 
observe any of the conditions of his recognizance, it may 
issue a warrant for his apprehension. 
(9) An offender, when apprehended on any such warrant, 
shall be brought forthwith before the Court issuing the 
warrant, and such Court may either remand him in custody 
until the case is heard or admit him to bail with a sufficient 
surety conditioned on his appearing for sentence and such 
Court may, after hearing the case, pass sentence.
(10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of 
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), or the 
Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960) or any other law for the time 
being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation 
of youthful offenders.” 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
583
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
28.	 From reading of the above, it is apparent that Section 360 of the 
CrPC and Sections 3 and 4 of the 1958 Act share a common thread 
i.e., reformation but at the same time their framework differs in their 
scope and structure. Section 360 of CrPC creates eligibility distinctions 
based on age and gender. In case of persons under 21 years of 
age and women, benefit is extended to all offences not punishable 
with death or life imprisonment, while restricting person not below 21 
years of age to offences carrying a maximum of seven years or less 
or fine only. On the other hand, Sections 3 and 4 of the 1958 Act, 
extend the benefit universally without any age or gender classification, 
focusing on the nature of the offence and the character of the 
offender. At this stage, it is also pertinent to take note of Section 6 
of the 1958 Act, which casts a positive obligation upon the Court to 
record reasons for not dealing the offender under Sections 3 and 4 
of 1958 Act, in case such offender is below twenty-one years of age 
having committed offence not punishable with imprisonment for life. 
Therefore, the distinction sought to be created by Section 6 based 
on age of the offender is in different context.
29.	 Benefit under Section 360(1) and (3) of CrPC can enure only in 
absence of a prior conviction, whereas Section 4 of the 1958 Act 
leaves antecedents of the offender to the Court’s discretion, and 
Section 3 of the 1958 Act while requiring absence of prior conviction 
also expands the concept of previous conviction to include prior 
orders under the Section 3 and 4 of the 1958 Act itself. Importantly, 
Section 360 CrPC is bereft of any supervisory mechanism whatsoever, 
while Section 4 of the 1958 Act establishes an elaborate mechanism 
involving probation officers, supervision orders, and conditions 
as prescribed in sub-section (3) and (4). Moreover, 1958 Act 
contemplates report of the probation officer which is absent from 
the framework of Section 360 CrPC.
30.	 The relationship between the Section 360 of CrPC and the 1958 Act 
has been subject matter of judicial pronouncements by this Court. 
The Division Bench of this Court in Sanjay Dutt (A-117) v. State of 
Maharashtra7, while relying upon the inherent differences between 
these two frameworks, held that they could not be intended to co-
exist. It was observed as thus –
7	
2013 SCC OnLine SC 252

584
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“81. Section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure does 
not provide for any role for probation officers in assisting 
the courts in relation to supervision and other matters 
while the Probation of Offenders Act does make such a 
provision. While Section 12 of the Probation of Offenders 
Act states that a person found guilty of an offence and dealt 
with under Section 3 or 4 of the Probation of Offenders 
Act, shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attached to 
the conviction of an offence under any law. The Code of 
Criminal Procedure does not contain parallel provision. Two 
statutes with such significant differences could not be 
intended to co-exist at the same time in the same area. 
Such co-existence would lead to anomalous results. 
The intention to retain the provisions of Section 360 
of the Code and the Probation of Offenders Act as 
applicable at the same time in a given area cannot be 
gathered from the provisions of Section 360 or any 
other provisions of the Code.”
31.	 Nonetheless, this issue fell for consideration before another Division 
Bench in Lakhanlal v. State of M.P.8, where this Court held both the 
frameworks to be mutually co-existent in following words –
“14. At this stage, it may be noticed that a two-Judge 
Bench of this Court in Sanjay Dutt v. State of Maharashtra 
[Sanjay Dutt v. State of Maharashtra, (2013) 13 SCC 1, 
at p. 964 : (2014) 7 SCC (Cri) 1, at p. 964] considering 
the provisions of Section 360 of the Code and Sections 3 
and 4 of the 1958 Act held that the co-existence of such 
provisions would lead to anomalous results. It was further 
held that the intention to retain the provisions of Section 
360 of the Code and the 1958 Act at the same time in 
a given area cannot be gathered from the provisions of 
Section 360 or any provision of the Code, when the Court 
held as under : (SCC p. 1012, para 2935)
“2935. Section 360 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure does not provide for any role for 
probation officers in assisting the courts in 
8	
(2021) 6 SCC 100

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
585
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
relation to supervision and other matters while 
the Probation of Offenders Act does make such 
a provision. While Section 12 of the Probation of 
Offenders Act states that a person found guilty 
of an offence and dealt with under Section 3 or 
4 of the Probation of Offenders Act, shall not 
suffer disqualification, if any, attached to the 
conviction of an offence under any law. The Code 
of Criminal Procedure does not contain parallel 
provision. Two statutes with such significant 
differences could not be intended to co-exist 
at the same time in the same area. Such co-
existence would lead to anomalous results. The 
intention to retain the provisions of Section 360 
of the Code and the Probation of Offenders 
Act as applicable at the same time in a given 
area cannot be gathered from the provisions of 
Section 360 or any other provisions of the Code.”
15. We find that the attention of the Court was not drawn 
to sub-section (10) of Section 360 which provides that 
Section 360 will not affect the provisions of the 1958 
Act or other similar laws for the time being in force 
for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful 
offenders. Still further, Section 4 of the 1958 Act has 
a non obstante clause, giving overriding effect over 
any other provisions of law.
16. The conjoint reading of the provisions of both the 
statutes, we find that the provisions of Section 360 of 
the Code are in addition to the provisions of the 1958 
Act or the Children Act, 1960, or any other law for the time 
being in force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation 
of youthful offenders.”
32.	 Therefore, it can be concluded that there have been divergent 
opinions of this Court with respect to relationship between Section 
360 CrPC and 1958 Act. Be that as it may, we are only concerned 
with the issue whether offenders sentenced with ‘fine only’ can be 
granted benefit of Section 4 of 1958 Act and for that purpose alone 
we may take assistance from the language of Section 360 of CrPC 

586
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
which may be different in its scope, but forms part of the reformative 
approach shared by both the frameworks. 
33.	 Even under the provision of CrPC, the legislative intent is reflective 
of the fact that in cases of minor offences that falls within the scope 
of Section 360 of CrPC, deterrent approach of punishment ought 
to be avoided while applying the reformative approach so that the 
offender need not face the deleterious effect of jail life as well as 
the stigma of conviction and such person can lead his life upon 
reintegration in society with dignity.
34.	 At this stage, it is important to ascertain as to under what circumstances 
an offender, who was found guilty for offences as prescribed, can avail 
the benefit of Sections 3 and 4 of the 1958 Act. It is also necessary 
to enumerate what may be relevant factors for the Court that can be 
taken into consideration while passing orders under Sections 3 and 
4 of the 1958 Act. In this regard, we can profitably refer to various 
precedents explaining the circumstances in which such benefit can 
be extended. 
35.	 In Rattan Lal (Supra), this Court was having an occasion to consider 
the object of Sections 3 and 4, in general, and Section 6, in particular, 
of the 1958 Act. It was observed that – 
“4. The Act is a milestone in the progress of the modern 
liberal trend of reform in the field of penology. It is the 
result of the recognition of the doctrine that the object 
of criminal law is more to reform the individual offender 
than to punish him. Broadly stated, the Act distinguishes 
offenders below 21 years of age and those above that 
age, and offenders who are guilty of having committed 
an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life 
and those who are guilty of a lesser offence. While in 
the case of offenders who are above the age of 21 years 
absolute discretion is given to the court to release them 
after admonition or on probation of good conduct, subject 
to the conditions laid down in the appropriate provisions 
of the Act, in the case of offenders below the age of 21 
years an injunction is issue to the court not to sentence 
them to imprisonment unless it is satisfied that having 
regard to the circumstances of the case; including the 
nature of the offence and the character of the offenders, it 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
587
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
is not desirable to deal with them under Sections 3 and 4 
of the Act.” 
36.	 This Court, while considering the factors relevant for the purpose 
of extending the benefit of Section 360 CrPC or of 1958 Act, in Ved 
Prakash (Supra) opined that the Court must ascertain relevant 
material regarding social background and the personal information 
of the crime-doer. While releasing the accused on probation of good 
conduct, this Court, through Krishna Iyer, J. observed as thus –
“…..The materials before us are imperfect because the trial 
court has been perfunctory in discharging its sentencing 
functions. We must emphasise that sentencing an 
accused person is a sensitive exercise of discretion 
and not a routine or mechanical prescription acting 
on hunch. The trial court should have collected 
materials necessary to help award a just punishment 
in the circumstances. The social background and the 
personal factors of the crime-doer are very relevant 
although in practice criminal courts have hardly 
paid attention to the social milieu or the personal 
circumstances of the offender. Even if Section 360 CrPC 
is not attracted, it is the duty of the sentencing court to be 
activist enough to collect such facts as have a bearing on 
punishment with a rehabilitation slant…..
…..In the present case, the offender is a young person 
and his antecedents have no blemish. His life is not 
unsettled or restless and the report indicates that he 
is an agriculturist, pursuing a peaceful vocation. His 
parents are alive and he has a wife and children to 
maintain. These are stabilising factors in life. A long 
period of litigation and the little period of imprisonment 
suffered, will surely serve as a deterrent. We are 
mindful of the fact that a firearm has been used by 
the appellant and we cannot sleep over the gravity of 
the offence. Nevertheless, the report of the Probation 
Officer states that the appellant is not given to any 
bad habits or stresses of poverty. A land dispute led 
to the crime and that does not survive any longer. The 
Probation Officer recommends that an opportunity be 

588
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
given to the appellant to improve himself and bring up 
his family by honest labour as an agriculturist so that 
the interests of social defence may be secured. We 
are inclined to agree that in this case the appellant may 
be given the benefit of the Probation of Offenders Act. We 
are satisfied that the offender has a fixed place of abode 
and regular occupation. We are inclined also to rely on the 
Probation Officer’s report which supports the direction for 
release on probation. We, therefore, direct that the appellant 
be released under Section 4(1) of the Probation of Offenders 
Act, 1958, and instead of sentencing him, direct that he 
be released on his entering into a bond before the trial 
court with two sureties, one of whom shall be his father, to 
appear and receive sentence when called upon during the 
period of three years from the date of release and in the 
meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour. 
In addition, we pass an order that the Probation Officer 
shall have supervision over the offender for a period of 
one year and shall make reports once every three months 
to the Sessions Court about the conduct of the offender. 
We direct further, that the appellant shall be specially 
supervised from the point of consumption of intoxicants 
and the matter brought to the notice of the court in case 
the appellant violates. The undertaking to be incorporated 
in his bond shall contain a term that he shall not consume 
alcohol during the period covered by the bond. We allow 
the appeals in the manner above indicated.” 
As indicated, other factors that were considered are age, antecedents, 
character, habits, economic conditions, occupation, fixed place of 
abode, familial responsibilities, gravity of offence, origin of dispute 
etc., so that an opportunity can be given to the accused to improve 
himself and to bring up his family or may live with sense of social 
security. 
37.	 Similarly, when grant of relief under Section 4 of the 1958 Act came 
up for consideration in State of Maharashtra v. Jagmohan Singh 
Kuldip Singh Anand 9 for offences under Sections 324, 452/34 
9	
(2004) 7 SCC 659

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
589
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
IPC, this Court in the circumstances extended benefit of probation 
subject to execution of a bond for good behavior. Factors that were 
considered by this Court may have some significance; therefore, the 
relevant paragraph is reproduced as under –
“27. The learned counsel appearing for the accused 
submitted that the incident is of the year 1990. The parties 
are educated and neighbours. The learned counsel, 
therefore, prayed that benefit of the Probation of 
Offenders Act, 1958 may be granted to the accused. 
The prayer made on behalf of the accused seems to 
be reasonable. The incident is more than 10 years old. 
The dispute was between the neighbours over a trivial 
issue of cleaning of drainage. The incident took place 
in a fit of anger. All the parties are educated and also 
distantly related. The incident is not such as to direct 
the accused to undergo sentence of imprisonment. In 
our opinion, it is a fit case in which the accused should 
be released on probation by directing them to execute a 
bond of one year for good behaviour.”
38.	 In another case of Dalbir Singh v. State of Haryana10, this Court 
was having an occasion to consider the circumstances of the case 
and the nature of offences in which the court may exercise power 
under Section 4 of the 1958 Act. Although the plea of the accused in 
that case vis-à-vis grant of such benefit was rejected, nonetheless, 
it was observed as thus – 
“8. Parliament made it clear that only if the court forms the 
opinion that it is expedient to release him on probation for 
his good conduct regard being had to the circumstances 
of the case. One of the circumstances which cannot be 
sidelined in forming the said opinion is “the nature of the 
offence”.
9. Thus Parliament has left it to the court to decide when 
and how the court should form such opinion. It provided 
sufficient indication that releasing the convicted 
person on probation of good conduct must appear 
10	
(2000) 5 SCC 82

590
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
to the court to be expedient. The word “expedient” had 
been thoughtfully employed by Parliament in the section 
so as to mean it as “apt and suitable to the end in view”. 
In Black’s Law Dictionary the word expedient is defined 
as “suitable and appropriate for accomplishment of a 
specified object” besides the other meaning referred to 
earlier. In State of Gujarat v. Jamnadas G. Pabri [(1975) 
1 SCC 138 : AIR 1974 SC 2233] a three-Judge Bench of 
this Court has considered the word “expedient”. Learned 
Judges have observed in para 21 thus: (SCC p. 145)
“Again, the word ‘expedient’ used in this provisions, has 
several shades of meaning. In one dictionary sense, 
‘expedient’ (adj.) means ‘apt and suitable to the end in view’, 
‘practical and efficient’; ‘politic’; ‘profitable’; ‘advisable’, ‘fit, 
proper and suitable to the circumstances of the case’. In 
another shade, it means a device ‘characterised by mere 
utility rather than principle, conducive to special advantage 
rather than to what is universally right’ (see Webster’s New 
International Dictionary).”
10. It was then held that the court must construe the said 
word in keeping with the context and object of the provision 
in its widest amplitude. Here the word “expedient” is 
used in Section 4 of the PO Act in the context of 
casting a duty on the court to take into account “the 
circumstances of the case including the nature of the 
offence…”. This means Section 4 can be resorted 
to when the court considers the circumstances of 
the case, particularly the nature of the offence, and 
the court forms its opinion that it is suitable and 
appropriate for accomplishing a specified object that 
the offender can be released on probation of good 
conduct.”
39.	 Therefore, release on probation of good conduct under Section 4 
of the 1958 Act depends on the Court forming an opinion that such 
release is expedient. In doing so, the Court must consider relevant 
factors, particularly the nature of the offence. Naturally, probation 
should be granted only where the Court records the satisfaction as 
per the factors indicated above, and grant of benefit would serve 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
591
Milind S/o Ashruba Dhanve and Ors. v. The State of Maharashtra
the purpose with intent to reform the offenders. The said judgment 
has been followed in the case of Mohd. Hashim v. State of U.P.11, 
whereby benefit under Section 4 of the 1958 Act in a case involving 
offences under Section 323 and 498-A of IPC along with Section 
3 and 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 was granted by this Court. 
40.	 In light of the above analysis, now we may embark upon to consider 
the case of Appellants for purpose of benefit under 1958 Act. In the 
instant case, the Appellants were convicted under Section 323 and 
324 of IPC and the allegations as proved relates to assault upon the 
persons belonging to same locality. The Appellants were sentenced 
to pay a fine of only Rs. 500/- under Section 323 and Rs. 2000/- 
under Section 324 of IPC. As such, it is apparent that, the trial Court 
as well as the High Court did not award any imprisonment to the 
Appellants and directed only payment of fine. 
41.	 Moreover, this Court vide order dated 10.02.2025 sought report 
from the State regarding the conduct and of any subsequent or 
prior involvement in commission of any offence. In the affidavit filed 
on 22.02.2025, it is said that only present criminal case has been 
registered against the Appellants. Further, as borne from the records, 
it is seen that A-1 and A-4 are employed with State Government 
in Public Work Department and as Assistant Teacher in Education 
Department respectively. It is also pertinent to note that the Appellants 
have not committed an offence involving moral turpitude. Given the 
said circumstances and considering the purport of Section 3 and 
Section 4 of 1958 Act, we find it expedient to extend the benefit of 
said provisions to the Appellants. 
CONCLUSION
42.	 In view of the above discussion, A-1, A-2 and A-3 who have been 
sentenced with fine under Sections 323 and 324 read with Section 
34 of IPC, therefore, they do not satisfy the pre-requisite contained in 
Section 3. Thus, while confirming the conviction, we direct that they 
be granted benefit under Section 4(1) of the 1958 Act and instead of 
sentencing them, we direct that they be released on entering into a 
bond for one year before the jurisdictional Trial Court with sureties. 
Moreover, they are further directed to appear and receive sentence 
11	
(2017) 2 SCC 198 

592
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
as and when called upon during the said period from the date of 
release. They shall further maintain peace and good behavior, and 
the Probation Officer shall keep supervision and submit report once 
in every three months to the Court concerned. Any other conditions 
may also be imposed by the Court, if deemed necessary. 
43.	 Insofar as A-4 is concerned, he has been sentenced for the charge 
under Section 323 read with Section 34 of IPC, which satisfies the 
pre-requisites of Section 3 of 1958 Act. Therefore, we extend the 
benefit of the said Section in his favour and instead of sentencing 
him, we direct that he be released after due admonition by the 
jurisdictional Court. 
44.	 We make it clear that the amount of fine as directed by the Trial 
Court and confirmed by High Court, to be paid by all the Appellants, 
if not already deposited, shall be deposited before the jurisdictional 
Court, and be treated as compensation towards the victim(s). The 
amount shall be paid within a period of 4 weeks from the date of this 
judgment, failing which, the jurisdictional Court shall take appropriate 
steps for recovery and send a report to the Registry of this Court.
45.	 Moreover, since all the Appellants have been extended the benefit 
under Sections 3 and 4 of the 1958 Act, they shall not incur any 
disqualification affecting their service career, if any, arising out of the 
conviction, in terms of Section 12 of the 1958 Act.
46.	 Accordingly, the appeal stands disposed-of in above terms. Pending 
application(s), if any, shall stand disposed-of. 
Result of the case: Appeal disposed of.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
