[2026] 4 S.C.R. 381 : 2026 INSC 319
Dr. S. Balagopal
v.
State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
(Criminal Appeal No. 1753 of 2026)
06 April 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Manoj Misra,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the High Court was right in not quashing 
the proceedings against the appellant surgeon who performed 
Orchidectomy-removal of testicle on the one and a half year boy, 
without obtaining the consent by the father-de facto complainant, 
as alleged.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.482 – Penal Code, 1860 – 
Appellant-surgeon performed Orchidopexy-surgical procedure, 
on a one and a half year boy, for which doctors had obtained 
consent – Appellant also performed Orchidectomy-removal 
of testicle on the boy – Allegations by the father-de facto 
complainant that no consent was given for Orchidectomy – 
FIR registered u/ss.312, 325, 426, 120-B, 406, 465, 468, 471 
and s.501 (1) & (2) IPC against the doctor – Charge-sheet 
submitted and the Magistrate took cognizance – Petitions filed 
u/s.482 Cr.P.C., by the complainant to constitute a Medical 
Board of three members so that a fair opinion is obtained – 
Pursuant to the directions, the Medical Board constituted 
which submitted its report – Petition also filed by the appellant 
seeking quashing of the proceedings – High Court rejected 
the same – Correctness:
Held: In the opinion of the Medical Board the procedure 
adopted was appropriate – Moreover, the operating surgeon 
is the best judge of which one of the two procedures is to be 
adopted – As regards any interpolation in the consent form to 
add the alternative procedure-Orchidectomy, being a question 
of fact is to be determined in a trial based on evidence led 
therein and, thus, courts must be loath to examine such issues 
* Author

382
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in a summary proceeding, like the one u/s.482  – However, no 
absolute bar on High Court’s power to consider questions of 
fact in exercise of jurisdiction u/s.482, particularly when such 
consideration necessary to prevent the abuse of the process of 
the court or to secure the ends of justice – No malice attributed 
to the doctor and no dispute that the consent form was executed 
for undertaking medical procedure – Medical opinion is to the 
effect that the procedure adopted by the doctor was one of the 
alternatives recognized to meet such medical exigency – No doubt, 
Medical Board’s opinion indicates that such procedure should be 
carried out after obtaining consent, but nothing to indicate that 
the consent form already obtained was not in order or that no 
consent was obtained – Perusal of the consent letter indicates 
that in the column where the nature of proposed surgery is to be 
mentioned, both types of surgery-Orchidopexy and Orchidectomy 
are mentioned by putting a slash, which means that the other 
surgery, namely, Orchidectomy, was one of the options available – 
No material on record that alternative surgery, Orchidectomy, 
was entered by a different ink or in a different handwriting, and 
having regard to the Medical Board’s opinion that in such medical 
situations, Orchidectomy is a normal alternative, continuance of 
criminal proceeding against the appellant abuse of the process 
of the court and, thus, to secure the ends of justice, the same is 
quashed – Impugned judgment and order of the High Court set 
aside. [Paras 17-21]
Case Law Cited
Jacob Mathew v. State of Punjab [2005] Supp. 2 SCR 307 : (2005) 
6 SCC 1 – held inapplicable.
List of Acts
Penal Code, 1860; Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
List of Keywords
Quashing the proceedings; Surgeon; Orchidectomy-removal of 
testicle; Without obtaining consent by the father; Surgeon performed 
Orchidopexy-surgical procedure that moves an undescended 
testicle into the scrotum; Doctor obtained consent; Constitute 
Medical Board; Fair opinion; Medical Board report.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
383
Dr. S. Balagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
1753 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.09.2023 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in CRLOP No. 23349 of 2016.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
K. Ravi Anantha Padmanabhan, Sr. Adv., T. R. B. Sivakumar, 
Deva Vrat Anand.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
V Krishnamurthy, Sr. A.A.G., D.kumanan, Ms. Deepa S, Sheikh F 
Kalia, Veshal Tyagi, Chinmay Anand Panigrahi, Ms. Azka Sheikh 
Kalia.
Respondent-in-person.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Manoj Misra, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
This appeal arises from a petition1 filed under Section 482 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732 seeking quashing of the 
proceedings in C.C. No. 13 of 2008 on the file of Judicial Magistrate 
No.1, Poonamallee3. By the order impugned dated 25.09.2023, the 
High Court of Judicature at Madras4 rejected the prayer to quash the 
proceedings and issued a direction to expedite the same.
FACTS
3.	
The second respondent (R-2) i.e., the de facto complainant made 
a complaint, inter alia, alleging that his son, aged one and one-half 
1	
CRL. O.P. No. 23349/2016
2	
Cr.P.C.
3	
The learned Magistrate
4	
The High Court

384
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
years, was admitted in a hospital for a surgical procedure as one of 
his testicles had not descended into the scrotal sac. According to R-2, 
doctors had obtained his consent for Orchidopexy (i.e., the surgical 
procedure that moves an undescended testicle into the scrotum), 
but there was no consent for Orchidectomy (i.e., removal of testicle). 
R-2 also alleged that prior to the surgery, the operating surgeon 
had explained that in 99 percent of such cases there is no need to 
remove the testicle. Therefore, specific consent for Orchidectomy 
was neither sought nor given. Yet, Orchidectomy was performed and 
in the consent form, by interpolation, Orchidectomy was inserted, 
which amounted to an offence of forgery.
4.	
Based on the aforesaid allegations, a first information report5 was 
registered at P.S. Ambathur on 08.08.2006 (i.e., FIR No. 1196 of 
2006) under Sections 312, 325, 426, 120-B, 406, 465, 468, 471 and 
section 501 (1) & (2) of the Indian Penal Code, 18606.
5.	
On the aforesaid FIR, the police, after investigation, submitted a 
charge-sheet against the appellant (i.e., the operating surgeon) on 
which the learned Magistrate took cognizance and registered C.C. 
No. 13 of 2008. Aggrieved therewith, two petitions under Section 
482 of Cr.P.C. were filed before the High Court. One was by R-2, 
inter alia, to constitute a Medical Board of three members so that a 
fair opinion is obtained. The second was by the appellant seeking 
quashing of the proceedings of C.C. No. 13 of 2008. The High Court 
vide order dated 19.03.2013 disposed of these two petitions in the 
following terms:
“14. Accordingly, both the criminal original petitions, namely 
Crl. O.P. No.18043 of 2008 and Crl. O.P. No.7614 of 2008 
are disposed of with the following directions:
a) The prayer for quashing of the criminal proceedings in 
CC. No.13 of 2008 made by the accused in his petition in 
Crl. O.P. No.7614 of 2008 shall stand rejected.
b) Since further investigation has been ordered, all further 
proceedings in CC. No.13 of 2008 shall stand stayed till 
the completion of the further investigation and submission 
5	
FIR
6	
IPC

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
385
Dr. S. Balagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
of the further report subject to a rider that the accused 
shall cooperate with the Investigating Officer in conducting 
further investigation.
c) The first part of the prayer made in Crl. O.P. No.18043 
of 2008 filed by the de facto complainant viz., for a 
direction to the Investigating Officer to act impartially is 
negatived.
d) The second part of the prayer made in Crl. O.P. No.18043 
of 2008 praying for constitution of the Medical Board is 
allowed and the Director of Medical Services, Chennai 
is directed to constitute a Medical Board consisting of 
following persons:
i) A Specialist in Paediatric Surgery in Government 
Services;
ii) An expert in Pathology in Government Services; and 
iii) An expert in Oncology in Government Services.
e) The Medical Board should be constituted within one 
month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order 
and the Medical Board shall submit the report as early 
as possible preferably within two months from the date 
of constitution of the Medical Board. The report shall be 
submitted to the Investigating Officer, marking a copy to 
the Registrar Judicial of the Court.
f) The Investigating Officer shall complete the investigation 
within two months after the receipt of the opinion of the 
Medical Board and submit further Final report.
g) It shall not be necessary for the accused to make 
periodical appearance before the learned Judicial 
Magistrate I, Poonamallee till the submission of further 
final report.
Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petitions are 
closed.”
6.	
Pursuant to the aforesaid directions, a Medical Board was constituted 
which submitted its report dated 29.07.2010. The same is reproduced 
below:

386
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“FACT FINDING INQUIRY REPORT BY THE MEDICAL 
BOARD CONSTITUTED IN RESPECT OF CRL. O. P No. 
18043 of 2008, MP No.2, 4 & 5 of 2008 & CRL. O. P No. 
7614 OF 2008 AND MP No.1 of 2008
As per the directions of the Hon’ble High Court of Madras 
issued in Crl. O P No. 18043 of 2008 M.P.No.2, 4 & 5 
of 2008 and Crl. O.P No 7614 of 2008 & M.P. No 1 of 
2008, I, the Director of Medical and Rural Health Services, 
Chennai-6 have constituted a Medical Board comprising 
the following specialists from Government Stanley Medical 
College Hospital, Chennai-1 to offer their expert medical 
opinion for the Left orchidectomy surgery done to one 
male child namely, (xxxx) (name masked), aged 2 years, 
son of (yyyy) (name masked).
1. Dr. Mary Lilly, Professor and Head of Department, 
Department of Pathology, Government Stanley Medical 
College Hospital, Chennai-1
2. Dr. J. Muthukumaran, Paediatric Surgeon, Government 
Stanley Medical College Hospital, Chennai 1
3. Dr. Ravel Naveen, Professor and Head of Department, 
Department of Medical Oncology, Government Stanley 
Medical College Hospital, Chennai – l 
The left Orchidectomy surgery was done to the child by 
one doctor namely Dr. Balagopal at M/s Sri Ramachandra 
Medical Centre Hospital, Porur on 24/08/2005. Orchidectomy 
surgery means removal of testis from the body. Orchidopexy 
means retaining the testis and placing in the anatomical 
position in the body. The constituted Medical Board was 
convened on 01/07/20 13 and opined as follows:
The Professor of Pathology, Government Stanley 
Medical College Hospital, Chennai-1 has opined as
The Histopathology Report carrying Hospital No.0000339902 
of (xxxx) (name masked) 2 years a Male child.
Accession No G.1852/05 under the unit by Dr. Balagopal 
S. dated 31/08/2005. Histopathology Report copy received 
shows:

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
387
Dr. S. Balagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
1. Microscopy describes the tissue received and studied 
as on soft tissue l X 0.5 cm. No special features/ organ 
mentioned.
2. Microscopy describes the tissues to be testis and 
Epididymis with focal fibrotic areas.
The pathological changes observed is ‘Focal fibrosis’.
No other pathological character is described.
The change described as focal fibrosis is consistent with 
pathological changes observed in undescended testis.
The Professor of Medical Oncology, Government 
Stanley Medical College Hospital, Chennai-1 has 
opined as
2 years old child had a history of left undescended testis 
and had undergone left orchidectomy. Pathology report 
shows no features of malignancy in the undescended 
testis specimen.
According to the operative findings the left testis was very 
small, cystic and dysplastic and hence probably a left 
orchidectomy was done.
Undescended testis is a risk factor for development of 
malignancy.
The Professor and Head of Department, Department 
of Pediatric Surgery, Government Stanley Medical 
College Hospital, Chennai-1 has opined as
In case of undescended Testis generally the affected Testis 
will be smaller than the normal size (or) it may present 
as nubbin of tissue as the child grows (or) it may go in 
form Torsion and gangrene of the testis as a complication.
In case of Nubbin of tissue as it does not serve the purpose 
(testis shape, sperm production) and more chance of 
malignant transformation orchidectomy is preferred than 
doing orchidopexy.
In case of torsion testis and gangrene, orchidectomy is 
preferred.

388
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
As per the case sheet and operation theatre notes, the 
left testis seems to be (small, cystic, dysplastic, 0.7cm 
size) a nubbin of tissue when compared with the testis on 
the other side. In that situation the nubbin of tissue could 
have been removed after:
1. Explaining in detail about the problems of retaining the 
affected testis.
2. Getting consent from the parents for doing orchidectomy 
to the child.
CONCLUSIVE OPINION
Pathology Speciality report reveals that at the time of 
histopathological examination there is focal fibrosis present 
in the sample. (No evidence of malignant changes).
Department of Medical Oncology report reveals that the 
left testis was very small, cystic and dysplastic and hence 
probably a left orchidectomy was done.
Undescended testis is a risk factor for development of 
malignancy.
Department of Pediatric Surgery report reveals that 
In case of Nubbin of tissue as it does not serve the purpose 
(testis shape, sperm production) and more chance of 
malignant transformation, orchidectomy is preferred than 
doing orchidopexy.
a.	
Explaining in detail about the problems of retaining 
the affected testis.
b.	
Getting consent from the parents for doing 
orchidectomy to the child.
Hence it is opined that left orchidectomy surgery done to 
the child (xxxx) (name masked), 2 years old, son of (yyyy) 
(name masked) is an appropriate surgical procedure as 
per medical ethics and it should have been done with the 
consent of parents.
Sd/- Director of Medical and Rural Health Services”
7.	
On receipt of the aforesaid report, the Investigating Officer wrote 
a letter to the Director, Directorate of Medical and Rural Health 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
389
Dr. S. Balagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
Services, Chennai seeking an opinion on the consent form which 
was obtained before the surgery. In response to the letter of the 
Investigating Officer, a letter was issued from the office of the Director 
of Medical and Rural Health Services, Chennai to the Investigating 
Officer on 24.02.2014, stating as follows:
“MEDICAL AND RURAL HEALTH SERVICES 
DEPARTMENT
From
Dr. A. Chandranathan, M.D.,
Director of Medical and Rural Health Services,
Chennai - 6.
To
Inspector of Police,
T-15, SRMC Police Station,
Porur, Chennai - 600 116.
Sir,
Ref. No. 32780/ E7/ 3/ 2014, dated 24.02.2014.
Sub: Criminal case in Cr.No.1196/2006 of T 15 SRMC 
PS  – investigation pending - ascertain clarification 
required - in the interest of successful prosecution of the 
case -regarding.
Ref: 
1.	
Letter along with the findings of the Tamil Nadu 
Directorate of Medical and Rural Health Services 
dated 27.07.2013.
2.	
The case is T15 SRMC PS Cr. No .1196/ 2006.
3.	
Your letter date is 18.01.2014.
********
1.	
The left Orchidectomy surgery done to the child 
namely xxxx (name masked), 2 years old boy, Son 
of yyyy (name masked) is an appropriate Surgery 
Procedure as per medical ethics and it should have 
been done with the consent of parents.

390
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
For this above point it is clarified that in the case sheet it is 
seen that informed consent for surgery in the printed form 
is attached. This printed consent is a general procedure 
for all the surgeries / treatment and is being obtained 
from patients in each and every hospital. In this context, 
it is mentioned “I understand that a diagnosis of Bilateral 
undescended testis has been made on me and that surgical 
operation Bilateral Orchidopexy / Left Orchidectomy has 
been advised by my doctor”.
In any surgery, the surgeon should have explained “what 
procedure he is going to do with the patient and its 
complication / nature of surgery in person, to ·the relative. 
In this case the doctor has adopted general procedure 
of obtaining consent in the printed form in which the 
‘Orchidectomy’ is written, medical terms which the parents 
could not understand.
In this particular surgery, it is ascertained that only after 
opening; the surgeon have come to a conclusion of 
removing the unwanted testis and before removing the 
testis he has obtained the consent in the printed form 
may be without explaining the nature of surgery in detail 
to the parents.
(a) He has obtained the consent of the parents of the child 
specifically to conduct the surgery towards removal of left 
testis of xxxx (name masked) in printed form.
(b) Yes per used.
(c) The consent is obtained by Dr. Balagopal explaining 
the consequences of retaining the left testis, which may 
develop into malignancy or abscess formation (discharge 
summary).
(d) Prosecution could not be made against the doctor 
since he has done the procedure as per medical ethics 
and as he has explained the consequences of retaining 
the left testis in the body, which may form abscess or 
turn malignant.
(e) No

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
391
Dr. S. Balagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
(f) Not Applicable
As per the opinion of the Professor of Pediatric Surgery 
Dr. Balagopal has obtained the formal consent in ·the 
printed form (for all the surgical purpose duly filled in) 
explaining in detail about the problem of retaining the 
affected testis. In case of Nubbin of tissue as it does not 
serve the purpose (testis shape, sperm production) and 
more chance of malignant transformation.
Hence it is opined that the Left Orchidectomy done to one 
xxxx (name masked) son of Mr. yyyy (name masked) is 
an appropriate surgical procedure.
Dr. Balagopal has obtained the consent in the common 
printed form and explained in detail about the problem of 
retaining the affected testis to parents, saying the affected 
testis may transform to malignancy in future.
Yours faithfully,
For Director of Medical and Rural Health Services.”
(Emphasis supplied)
8.	
After obtaining the report dated 24.02.2014, an additional report 
was submitted giving details of the opinion of the Medical Board 
as reproduced above. The charge sheet submitted reads as 
under:
“CHARGE SHEET
 CHARGE SHEET IN T-15 SRMS POLICE STATION
Crime No. 1196/2006
U/S 336, 201, 465, & 471 IPC.
……….
ACCUSED: Dr. Balagopal, Age 38/2007 S/O K. Subramani, 
No. 7 Suriya Bharani Colony, Saligramam, Chennai – 600093
The accused noted in the margin is working as Consultant 
Pediatric Surgeon in SRMC Center at Porur, within the 
limits of SRMC PS. The hospital authority has authorized 
the accused to perform all kinds of surgery including 

392
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
orchidopexy and orchidectomy. The witness (yyyy) (name 
masked) is the father of male child (xxxx) (name masked) 
aged about 1 1/2 years. The witness (yyyy) (name 
masked) had admitted his child (xxxx) (name masked) 
on 23.08.2005 at SRMC Hospital for Hernia Operation. 
The hospital authority had referred the child (xxxx) to 
the accused for performing Hernia Operation on the 
child of witness (yyyy) (name masked) about the nature 
of the operation on which he is going to perform on the 
child i.e., hernia operation and also obtained consent 
letter from the witness (yyyy) (name masked) by clearly 
mentioning that the operation of positioning of testis 
(bilateral Orchidopexy). The accused has not mentioned 
anything about the removal of left testicle of the child in 
the consent letter. Therefore, the witness has also signed 
in the document believing that the accused would perform 
only bilateral Orchidopexy.
That on 24.08.2005 at about 3.30 P.M. at SRMC Hospital 
Operation theatre when the child (xxxx) (name masked) 
aged about 1 ½ year was admitted in the operation 
theatre for hernia operation, the accused noted in the 
margin being the surgeon of SRMC Hospital had acted 
in a rash and negligent manner at the time of performing 
the operation on the child and due to rash and negligent 
act, the accused had removed the left testicle of the child 
during the hernia operation. Therefore, the accused has 
committed the offence punishable u/s 336 IPC.
During the course of the same transaction the accused, 
the surgeon of the same hospital, knowing that he had 
performed the operation in a rash and negligent manner 
which is punishable with imprisonment, intentionally 
caused the disappearance of the evidence of his rash 
negligent act to escape from the legal punishment, altered 
the medical documents and consent letter for performing 
surgery. Thereby the accused has committed the offence 
punishable u/s 201 IPC.
During the course of the same transaction, the accused 
noted the margin has created a forged document by 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
393
Dr. S. Balagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
inserting a letter “left orchidectomy” in the consent letter of 
the complainant to make other to believe that this witness 
(yyyy) (name masked) had given consent for the removal 
of left testicle of his child, and also used the above said 
forged document as genuine to escape (sic) the legal 
punishment for the offence of negligent act. Thereby the 
accused has further committed the offences punishable 
u/s 465, 471 IPC
Hence the charge.
Sd/-
Inspector of Police
T-15 S.R.M.C. P.S.
Porur, Chennai - 116”
9.	
Aggrieved by the charge-sheet and the consequential proceedings, 
which continued even after the additional reports of medical experts, 
the appellant filed Crl. O.P. No. 23349 of 2016 for quashing the 
entire proceeding pending as C.C. No. 13 of 2008 on the file of the 
learned Magistrate.
10.	 By the impugned order, the High Court dismissed the petition. Hence, 
this appeal.
11.	 We have heard learned counsel for the appellant as well as the 
counsel appearing for the State. We also heard R-2 in person on 
one date. 
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
12.	 The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the medical 
report submitted by the Medical Board as well as the Final Report 
submitted by the Investigating Officer does not castigate the 
appellant for any kind of negligence. Moreover, it is now clear that 
Orchidectomy was the appropriate procedure. The only point of 
dispute is whether the de facto complainant i.e., father of the child 
was informed about the surgical procedure to be undertaken and 
whether there was a proper consent for that surgical procedure. 
In this regard, what is important is that there was a consent letter 
signed by R-2 for the surgery. The consent form was in a printed 
format and the column regarding the nature of surgery advised 
indicated “Bilateral Orchidopexy/Orchidectomy.” The allegation is 

394
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
that Orchidectomy was added by interpolation in the consent form 
to save the doctor from the allegation of conducting surgery without 
consent. It is contended that this very consent letter was sent to 
the Director for his opinion and the Director had opined that there 
was nothing suspicious about the consent. Besides, there is no 
forensic report regarding interpolation of ‘Orchidectomy’ made in the 
consent letter either by a different ink or in a different handwriting. 
It is also submitted that a bare perusal of the consent letter/form 
would indicate that it is in order. In these circumstances, it was 
argued, the High Court had erred in not quashing the criminal 
proceeding, particularly when there was a medical report in support 
of appellant’s case.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE STATE
13.	 Learned counsel appearing for the State submitted that though 
there may be no negligence on the part of the doctor in performing 
Orchidectomy, the doctor ought to have obtained a prior consent 
for the said surgical procedure. Once the de facto complainant 
alleges that he had not consented to Orchidectomy, it is a 
matter of trial whether such consent was there or not. In such 
circumstances, whether there was a valid consent or not, and 
whether the consent letter has been manipulated or not, can best be 
determined in a trial. Hence, the order of the High Court calls for no 
interference.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE DE-FACTO COMPLAINANT
14.	 The de-facto complainant (R-2), who appeared in person, submitted 
that during surgery the doctor had asked him on phone whether he 
should perform Orchidectomy or not. Further, the doctor informed 
that if Orchidectomy is not performed, possibility of malignancy 
in future cannot be ruled out. According to R-2, this question of 
the doctor was answered in the negative and R-2 had specifically 
stated that he would later consider whether removal of testis is to 
be undertaken. Despite that, the doctor proceeded with the surgery 
and removed the testicle without R-2’s consent and, to save himself, 
later, the consent form was manipulated to show that the consent 
was taken for Orchidectomy. In these circumstances, he prayed 
that prima facie commission of offence is made out and therefore, 
appeal be dismissed.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
395
Dr. S. Balagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
DISCUSSION
15.	 We have accorded due consideration to the rival submissions and 
have also perused the materials available on record.
16.	 Before we proceed to address the rival contentions, we must bear in 
mind that appellant-accused is a surgeon/doctor whose credentials 
as a surgeon /doctor are not in issue. The criminal law has invariably 
placed medical professionals on a pedestal different from ordinary 
mortals. The IPC enacted as far back as in the year 1860 sets out a 
few vocal examples. Section 88 in the Chapter on General Exceptions 
provides exemption for acts not intended to cause death, done by 
consent in good faith for person’s benefit. Section 92 provides for 
exemption for acts done in good faith for the benefit of a person 
without his consent though the acts cause harm to the person 
and that person has not consented to suffer such harm. Based on 
above, and upon a review of various decisions and reports, in Jacob 
Mathew v. State of Punjab7 this Court observed:
“48 (7). To prosecute a medical professional for negligence 
under criminal law it must be shown that the accused did 
something or failed to do something which in the given 
facts and circumstances no medical professional in his 
ordinary senses and prudence would have done or failed 
to do. The hazard taken by the accused doctor should be 
of such a nature that the injury which resulted was most 
likely imminent.” 
Having observed so, this Court proceeded to hold:
“52. … A private complaint may not be entertained unless 
the complainant has produced prima facie evidence before 
the court in the form of a credible opinion given by another 
competent doctor to support the charge of rashness 
or negligence on the part of the accused doctor. The 
investigating officer should, before proceeding against the 
doctor accused of rash or negligent act or omission, obtain 
an independent and competent medical opinion preferably 
from a doctor in government service, qualified in that branch 
of medical practice who can normally be expected to give 
7	
(2005) 6 SCC 1

396
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
an impartial and unbiased opinion applying the Bolam8 test 
to the facts collected in the investigation. ..”
17.	 In the instant case, the dispute is not regarding negligence on part 
of the appellant, therefore the law laid down in Jacob Mathew 
(supra) may not stricto sensu apply. However, the importance of 
Medical Review Board’s report cannot be undermined. It highlights 
the importance of Orchidectomy in cases related to undescended 
testicle. Though it is alleged by the de facto complainant that he had 
not consented for Orchidectomy, it is clear from the materials on 
record that prior to the surgery consent form was obtained from the 
father of the child. Thus, the issue is whether the consent was limited 
to surgical procedure of Orchidopexy. According to the appellant, the 
consent form had limited space in the column where the nature of 
surgery had to be mentioned therefore, Orchidectomy was written 
by putting a slash just below Orchidopexy in the consent form. What 
is important is that the consent form was sent by the Investigating 
Officer to the Director of the Medical and Rural Health Services for 
his opinion. The Director had not found any fault in the consent 
form. Rather, the Medical Board opines that Orchidectomy is an 
alternative procedure which may be undertaken to obviate chances 
of malignancy in future. Thus, in the opinion of the Medical Board 
the procedure adopted was appropriate. Moreover, the operating 
surgeon is the best judge of which one of the two procedures is to 
be adopted. Therefore, the only issue which requires consideration 
is whether there was any interpolation in the consent form to add 
the alternative procedure (i.e., Orchidectomy). 
18.	 Ordinarily, an issue of tampering/ interpolation in a document being a 
question of fact is to be determined in a trial based on evidence led 
therein and, therefore, courts must be loath to examine such issues 
in a summary proceeding, like the one under Section 482 Cr.P.C. 
However, there can be no absolute bar on High Court’s power to 
consider questions of fact in exercise of jurisdiction under Section 482 
8	
Bolam v. Frien Hospital Management Committee, (1957) 1 WLR 582: (1957) 2 All ER 118 (QBD)
“Where you get a situation which involves the use of some special skill or competence, then the 
test as to whether there has been negligence or not is not test of the man on the top of a Clapham 
omnibus, because he has not got this special skill. The test is the standard of the ordinary skilled 
man exercising and professing to have that special skill. A man need not possess the highest 
expert skill … It is well established law that it is sufficient if he exercises the ordinary skill of an 
ordinary competent man exercising that particular art.”

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
397
Dr. S. Balagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
Cr.P.C., particularly when such consideration is necessary to prevent 
the abuse of the process of the court or to secure the ends of justice. 
19.	 In the instant case, no malice is attributed to the doctor and there 
is no dispute that the consent form was executed for undertaking a 
medical procedure. Further, the medical opinion is to the effect that 
the procedure adopted by the doctor was one of the alternatives 
recognized to meet such a medical exigency. No doubt, Medical 
Board’s opinion indicates that such procedure should be carried 
out after obtaining consent, but there is nothing to indicate that the 
consent form already obtained was not in order or that no consent 
was obtained. Besides, the consent letter has been brought on record 
as Annexure P-2. A perusal thereof would indicate that in the column 
where the nature of proposed surgery is to be mentioned, both 
types of surgery i.e., Orchidopexy and Orchiectomy are mentioned 
by putting a slash (/), which means that the other surgery, namely, 
Orchidectomy, was one of the options available.
20.	 Taking a conspectus of all the facts and circumstances as also 
that there is no material on record that alternative surgery, namely, 
Orchidectomy, was entered by a different ink or in a different 
handwriting, and having regard to the Medical Board’s opinion that 
in such medical situations Orchidectomy is a normal alternative, we 
are of the view that continuance of criminal proceeding against the 
appellant would be nothing but abuse of the process of the court 
and, therefore to secure the ends of justice, the same is liable to 
be quashed. 
21.	 Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment and 
order of the High Court is set aside. The proceedings of C.C. No. 
13 of 2008 on the file of the learned Magistrate are hereby quashed. 
There is no order as to costs.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
