[2026] 4 S.C.R. 494 : 2026 INSC 340
Maurice W. Innis
v.
Lily Kazrooni @ Lily Arif Shaikh
(Civil Appeal No. 4321 of 2026)
09 April 2026
[Pankaj Mithal* and Prasanna. B. Varale, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue pertains to the execution of a compromise decree passed 
in a civil suit; and whether the executing court can go beyond the 
decree and has to execute the decree as it stands without making 
any modifications therein.
Headnotes†
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 – s.47 – Questions to be 
determined by the Court executing decree – Execution of a 
compromise decree passed in a suit – Defendant-respondent 
became decree holder and the plaintiff-appellant became 
judgment debtor – Executing Court in the execution petition 
modified the compromise decree by varying the area allotted 
to the parties under the compromise decree and allotted them 
some different portions – Review petition by the defendant-
respondent – Petition allowed and the modifications made 
by the Executing Court in the original compromise decree 
further modified – Thereagainst writ petition by the plaintiff-
appellant challenging the orders passed by the Executing 
Court, the order passed on review petition as well as the order 
directing the delivery of possession – Dismissed by the High 
Court – Correctness:
Held: Executing Court has to strictly conform to the decree under 
execution and if the decree provides for reciprocal obligations, it 
must ensure compliance of those conditions by both the parties 
in pith and substance, unless the decree is a nullity which is not 
the case herein – Executing Court has no jurisdiction to vary the 
terms of the decree – It is only where the dispute as to the identity 
of the land which has to be given as part of the obligation to the 
* Author

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
495
Maurice W. Innis v. Lily Kazrooni @ Lily Arif Shaikh
other side arises, the court can decide the same – In the instant 
case, no dispute of identity of the land falling into the shares of both 
the parties – Compromise decree clearly describes the portions 
of land falling into the shares of the parties – Thus, the Executing 
Court has to ensure that both the parties fulfil their obligations and 
exchange the land as per the decree and to see that the sale deed 
is executed as directed – Merely for the reasons that exchange of 
some portions of the land may not be practicable for the reason 
that constructions on it are not as per the sanctioned map or that 
part of it has been sold off, immaterial – Since the Executing Court 
in passing the orders has gone beyond its jurisdiction and instead 
of directing for the execution of the decree as it stands, altered 
its terms by changing certain portions of the land allotted to the 
parties, the same are unsustainable in law – Both the orders and 
the consequential order set aside – Execution Court to execute 
the decree in its terms and tenor. [Paras 24, 27, 29-31]
Case Law Cited
Jai Narain Ram Lundia v. Kedar Nath Khetan and Ors. [1956] 1 
SCR 62 : (1956) 1 SCC 75; Vasudev Dhanjibhai Modi v. Rajabhai 
Abdul Rehman and Ors. [1971] 1 SCR 66 : (1970) 1 SCC 670; 
Sunder Dass v. Ram Prakash [1977] 3 SCR 60 : (1977) 2 SCC 
662 – referred to.
List of Acts
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
List of Keywords
Execution of compromise decree passed in civil suit; Executing 
court, if can go beyond the decree; Compromise decree; Decree 
holder; Judgment debtor; Execution petition; Modifications made 
by the Executing Court.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
4321 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.04.2022 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay in WP No. 247 of 2022.

496
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Shoeb Alam, Sr. Adv., Anand Dilip Landge, Mrs. Sangeeta Nenwani, 
Ms. Revati Pravin Kharde,  Shreenivas Patil, Rahul Prakash Pathak.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Gopal Jha, Sanjeev Baliyan, Tilak Vij, Shreyash Bhardwaj, Nimish 
Arjaria, Sawan Datta, Ms. Shireesha Sharma.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
Heard learned counsel for the parties. 
2.	
Leave granted.
3.	
The dispute in this appeal is in connection with the execution of a 
compromise decree dated 14.07.2017 passed in a Civil Suit No. 68 
of 2012.
4.	
The suit land measures 51R (54895 sq. feet). It is a non-agricultural 
land of plot No.396(A) situate in village Panchgani, Taluka 
Mahabaleshwar, Satara in the State of Maharashtra. 
5.	
The plaintiff-appellant had purchased 97.12R area of land of plot 
no. 396(A) in village Panchgani as referred to above. The plaintiff-
appellant initially sold 57R of the aforesaid land purchased by him 
to the defendant-respondent. Thus, retaining only 40.12R with 
himself. The purchaser i.e., the defendant-respondent sold back 6R 
of the said land to the plaintiff-appellant. Thus, the plaintiff-appellant 
became the owner of a total of 46.12R of the aforesaid plot of land. 
The defendant-respondent after selling 6R to the plaintiff-appellant, 
remained with only 51R of the land out of the 57R initially purchased 
by him. The dispute is regarding this 51R of land retained by the 
defendant-respondent. 
6.	
The defendant-respondent entered into an agreement to sell the 
aforesaid 51R of land to the plaintiff-appellant vide registered 
agreement dated 17.04.2009. The plaintiff-appellant filed suit no.68 
of 2012 against the defendant-respondent praying for specific 

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
497
Maurice W. Innis v. Lily Kazrooni @ Lily Arif Shaikh
performance of the agreement to sell dated 17.04.2009. In the said 
suit, parties entered into a compromise on 08.07.2017. The said 
compromise inter alia provided that 10R of the said land would 
remain a common land in common ownership of both the partners. 
The remaining 41R of land would be equally divided between them 
to the extent of 20.5R each. The area of 20.5R to be retained by 
each one of them would be ascertained by the surveyor and the 
value of the bungalow and the plinth level construction existing on 
part of the said land would be determined by the Government valuer. 
Accordingly, a decree would be drawn. 
7.	
It appears that on the basis of the aforesaid compromise, the suit 
was decreed after completing the formalities of the survey and 
valuation. Finally, a decree was drawn on 14.07.2017 incorporating 
the respective areas falling into the share of each party.
8.	
The aforesaid compromise decree states that the plaintiff-appellant 
who had purchased 97.12R of plot No.396(A) of village Panchgani 
had a sanctioned map dated 09.04.2010 which is part and parcel 
of the compromise and that both parties agree to the said map. 
The disputed land is only 51R which is situate on the western side 
of plot No.396(A). The area of 10R is common land for exercise of 
easementary right as common road for access to their properties.
9.	
The aforesaid compromise decree in unequivocal terms provided 
that the area of residential bungalow and the area of construction 
up to the plinth level towards the southern side of the bungalow 
plus the area on the western side of plot No.396(A) including two 
bungalows shown in the sanctioned map, having a total area of 
20.5R goes to the share of the plaintiff-appellant. Thus, the area 
of 20.5R falling into the share of plaintiff-appellant was clearly 
described.
10.	 Similarly, the area of 20.5R falling into the share of defendant-
respondent was described as situate on the western side of the 
bungalow of the plaintiff-appellant and includes structures up to the 
plinth level extending up to the boundary of the two bungalows on 
eastern side. 
11.	 The decree also provided that the defendant-respondent shall execute 
the sale deed of the property falling into the share of the plaintiff-
appellant on consideration of Rs.10 lakhs which is already paid.

498
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
12.	 The said decree was put into execution by both the parties separately. 
The plaintiff-appellant filed Execution Petition No.38 of 2020, which 
allegedly remains pending as on date. The defendant-respondent 
filed a separate Execution Petition No.21 of 2018 for the execution 
of the aforesaid compromise decree dated 14.07.2017 claiming 
himself to be the decree holder. 
13.	 Accordingly, the defendant-respondent became the decree holder 
and the plaintiff-appellant became the judgment debtor. 
14.	 The Executing Court in Execution Petition No.21 of 2018 of the 
defendant-respondent passed an order on 19.07.2021 and issued 
certain directions, modifying the area of land allotted to the parties in 
the final compromise decree, to the Court Commissioner to execute 
the decree. The aforesaid modifications were made in the area allotted 
to the parties inter alia for the reason that the permanent constructions 
made to the extreme western side of the plot were not as per the 
sanctioned plan and, therefore, it was not practicable to allot that 
area to the defendant-respondent. It was also not considered to be 
practicable to allot the portion towards the extreme western side to 
the defendant-respondent as it was likely to cause inconvenience 
to her in future and that the area of 10R of the suit plot towards the 
extreme western side had already been sold by plaintiff-appellant 
to the third party. 
15.	 In short, the Executing Court varied the area allotted to the parties 
under the compromise decree and allotted them some different 
portions, thus in effect modifying the compromise decree.
16.	 The defendant-respondent was not satisfied and filed a review 
petition seeking further modification of the above order passed by the 
Executing Court. The aforesaid review petition was allowed by the 
order dated 26.08.2021 and the modifications made by the Executing 
Court in the original compromise decree were further modified.
17.	 Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order allowing the review 
petition, plaintiff-appellant filed a writ petition before the High 
Court challenging the orders passed by the Executing Court dated 
19.07.2021, order passed on review petition dated 26.08.2021 as well 
as the order dated 11.10.2021 directing the delivery of possession. 
Finally, the writ petition was dismissed on 21.04.2022. Thus, the 
orders passed by the Executing Court were upheld.

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
499
Maurice W. Innis v. Lily Kazrooni @ Lily Arif Shaikh
18.	 The plaintiff-appellant has thus preferred this appeal. 
19.	 It is in this background that we have heard Shri Shoeb Alam, senior 
counsel for the plaintiff-appellant and Shri Gopal Jha, counsel for 
the defendant-respondent.
20.	 The primary argument of the plaintiff-appellant is that the Executing 
Court cannot go beyond the decree and has to execute the decree 
as it stands without making any modifications therein. Therefore, 
the Executing Court manifestly erred in passing the order dated 
19.07.2021 and the order dated 26.08.2021 on review petition.
21.	 From the side of the defendant-respondent, it is submitted that the 
Executing Court has rightly interpreted the decree and in view of 
the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, respondent rightly 
allotted portions so that the decree does not become inexecutable. 
The Executing Court, in the facts and circumstances of the case, 
had correctly passed the orders dated 19.07.2021 and 26.08.2021. 
22.	 The counsel for the defendant-respondent relied upon a three judges 
bench decision in the case of Jai Narain Ram Lundia v. Kedar Nath 
Khetan and Ors.1 to contend that the Executing Court is not powerless 
to ensure that the parties are given the very thing that the decree directs 
and if there is any dispute in this regard, it is for the Executing Court 
to decide it and as such, there was no error on part of the Executing 
Court in passing the order dated 19.07.2021 or 26.08.2021
23.	 In order to address the controversy arising in this appeal, it would 
be profitable to first place Section 47 of Code of Civil Procedure2 
which provides for the questions to be determined by the Executing 
Court. The aforesaid Section 47 CPC is reproduced hereinbelow :-
“47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing 
decree: -
(1) All questions arising between the parties to the suit in 
which the decree was passed, or their representatives, 
and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of 
the decree, shall be determined by the Court executing 
the decree and not by a separate suit. 
1	
(1956) 1 SCC 75
2	
In short ‘CPC’

500
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(2) * * * * (omitted)
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or 
is not the representative of a party, such question shall, for 
the purposes of this section, be determined by the Court.”
24.	 A plain reading of the aforesaid provision makes it clear that the 
Executing Court is empowered to decide questions relating to 
execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree and has no 
jurisdiction to go beyond the decree sought to be executed. In other 
words, it has to execute the decree as it is without changing the 
same. It is settled in law that the jurisdiction of Executing Court is 
limited to give effect to the decree as passed and not to assume 
the role of a trial court so as to substitute its own view in place of 
that expressed under the decree.
25.	 In Vasudev Dhanjibhai Modi v. Rajabhai Abdul Rehman and 
Ors.3, it has been held as under :-
“6. A court executing a decree cannot go behind the decree: 
between the parties or their representatives it must take 
the decree according to its tenor, cannot entertain any 
objection that the decree was incorrect in law or on facts. 
Until it is set aside by an appropriate proceeding in appeal 
or revision, a decree even if it be erroneous is still binding 
between the parties.”
26.	 The aforesaid view has been reiterated and fortified by the Supreme 
Court in Sunder Dass v. Ram Prakash4. The relevant portion is 
reproduced hereinbelow :-
“3. Now, the law is well settled that an executing court 
cannot go behind the decree nor can it question its 
legality or correctness. But there is one exception to this 
general rule and that is that where the decree sought to 
be executed is a nullity for lack of inherent jurisdiction 
in the court passing it, its invalidity can be set up in an 
execution proceeding. Where there is lack of inherent 
jurisdiction, it goes to the root of the competence of the 
3	
(1970) 1 SCC 670
4	
(1977) 2 SCC 662

[2026] 4 S.C.R. 
501
Maurice W. Innis v. Lily Kazrooni @ Lily Arif Shaikh
court to try the case and a decree which is a nullity is void 
and can be declared to be void by any court in which it is 
presented. Its nullity can be set up whenever and wherever 
it is sought to be enforced or relied upon and even at 
the stage of execution or even in collateral proceedings. 
The executing court can, therefore, entertain an objection 
that the decree is a nullity and can refuse to execute the 
decree. By doing so, the executing court would not incur 
the reproach that it is going behind the decree, because 
the decree being null and void, there would really be 
decree at all. Vide Kiran Singh v. Chaman Paswan [AIR 
1954 SC 340 and Seth Hiralal Patni v. Sri Kali Nath [AIR 
1962 SC 199]. It is, therefore, obvious that in the present 
case, it was competent to the executing court to examine 
whether the decree for eviction was a nullity on the ground 
that the civil court had no inherent jurisdiction to entertain 
the suit in which the decree for eviction was passed. If the 
decree for eviction was a nullity, the executing court could 
declare it to be such and decline to execute it against the 
respondent.”
27.	 In view of the above case laws, the Executing Court has to strictly 
conform to the decree under execution and if the decree provides for 
reciprocal obligations, it must ensure compliance of those conditions 
by both the parties in pith and substance, unless the decree is a 
nullity which is not the case herein. 
28.	 In so far as the case relied upon by the defendant-respondent i.e. Jai 
Narain Ram Lundia (supra), it cuts no ice in her favour. The aforesaid 
decision simply states that if there are reciprocal obligations under 
the decree which are interlinked, the court must ensure compliance 
of reciprocal obligations. It further states that the Executing Court 
has power to determine that one party gives the very thing to the 
other party which the decree directs and in case any dispute in this 
regard arises it can be decided by the Executing Court, otherwise 
the Executing Court must execute the decree as it stands and cannot 
go beyond the decree and vary its term.
29.	 The above decision in clear terms states that the Executing Court 
has no jurisdiction to vary the terms of the decree. It is only where 
the dispute as to the identity of the land which has to be given as 

502
[2026] 4 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
part of the obligation to the other side arises, the court can decide 
the same.
30.	 In the instant case, there is no dispute of identity of the land falling 
into the shares of both the parties. The compromise decree clearly 
describes the portions of land falling into the shares of the parties. 
Therefore, the Executing Court has to ensure that both the parties 
fulfil their obligations and exchange the land as per the decree and to 
see that the sale deed is executed as directed. Merely for the reasons 
that exchange of some portions of the land may not be practicable 
for the reason that constructions on it are not as per the sanctioned 
map or that part of it has been sold off, are all immaterial. Since 
the Executing Court in passing the orders dated 19.07.2021 and 
26.08.2021 has gone beyond its jurisdiction and instead of directing 
for the execution of the decree as it stands, has altered its terms 
by changing certain portions of the land allotted to the parties, the 
same are unsustainable in law. Accordingly, both the above orders 
dated 19.07.2021 and 26.08.2021 and the consequential order dated 
11.10.2021 are hereby set aside. 
31.	 The appeal is allowed and the Execution Court is directed to execute 
the decree in its terms and tenor. 
32.	 Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
