[2026] 2 S.C.R. 168 : 2026 INSC 56
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar 
v.
State of Maharashtra & Ors. 
(Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 10105 of 2017)
13 January 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and 
Atul S. Chandurkar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Effective implementation of the mandate of s.12, Right of Children 
to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 ensuring admission of 
at least twenty-five percent of class strength in unaided schools with 
children of weaker and disadvantaged groups for free education.
Headnotes†
Constitution of India – Article 21A – Right to Education – 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – s.12– Directions by Supreme Court for effective 
implementation of s.12 and its mandate – Inaccessibility of 
twenty-five percent of class strength in a neighbourhood 
school to children belonging to weaker and disadvantaged 
groups u/s.12 for multifarious reasons viz. online application 
process, language barrier and lack of help desks to assist the 
parents/guardians, lack of information about the availability 
of seats, absence of transparency in the admission process – 
Suggestions made by the amicus curiae and the Ld. Additional 
Solicitor General highlighting the concerns and identifying 
areas requiring improvement viz. implementation of s.12 by 
the States/UTs and providing online portal for admission; 
language; information and assistance; transparency; 
establishment of help-desks and pro-active assistance during 
the application stage etc. – National and State Commissions 
for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) assigned with the 
task of reviewing, monitoring and redressing the grievances 
arising under the Act, issued Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) for implementation of s.12(1)(c), structured in three 
stages, (i) the preparatory stage, (ii) processing applications, 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
169
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
selection and admission and (iii) procedure after completion 
of admission:
Held: The obligation of a “neighbourhood school” to admit 
children belonging to weaker and disadvantaged sections of the 
society, to the extent of twenty five percent of the class strength, 
u/s.12 has the extraordinary capacity to transform the social 
structure of the society – Ensuring admission of such students 
must be a national mission and an obligation of the appropriate 
government and the local authority – To ensure a smooth and 
transparent admission process and in order to enable eligible 
children to access the right of admission u/s.12(1)(c), the steps 
to be taken as regards the Preparatory Stage (Finalization of 
seats, Advertisement, Schedule of admission, Centralized online 
system, Criteria, Documents, Information about the school, Dispute 
settlement); Processing Applications, Selection and Admission 
(Help-desks; Selection criteria; Scrutiny of applications, Window 
for correction of defects, Dispute resolution); After Completion of 
Admission Process (Speaking order, Admission process, Initiation 
of inquiry, Post-admission, Reimbursement, Finality of selection), 
enumerated – Appropriate authorities to prepare and issue, in 
consultation with the NCPCR and SCPCRs, as the case may be, as 
well as the National and State Advisory Councils, necessary rules 
and regulations u/s.38 of the Act for implementing the mandate 
of s.12(1)(c) of the Act – NCPCR, New Delhi to be impleaded 
as a party respondent – The copy of the order be sent to the 
Commission for compliance and monitoring  – Commission to 
collate information about the issuance of rules and regulations by 
the appropriate Governments of the States and Union Territories 
and file an affidavit before this Court by 31st of March, 2026 – 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 – ss.3, 17. 
[Paras 1, 6.3]
Constitution of India – Article 21A – Right to Education – 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – s.12 – Extent of school’s responsibility for free and 
compulsory education – ‘neighbourhood school’ denied 
admission to petitioner’s children for free and compulsory 
elementary education in 2016 – Petitioner filing writ petition, 
High Court turned back the petitioner on the ground that he 

170
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
had failed to take up appropriate steps to admit his kids in the 
free education quota – SLP thereagainst pending in Supreme 
Court for a long time:
Held: Unfortunately, the matter has become infructuous – However, 
in order to ensure that this situation shall not revisit parents like the 
petitioner again and again, case taken up for precedent making 
and to examine the efficiency and effectiveness of the procedures 
for complying with the mandate of s.12 – Amicus curiae appointed. 
[Para 3]
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – ss.12, 6, 9, 2(h), 10 – Extent of school’s responsibility 
for free and compulsory education – Duty of appropriate 
Government and local authority to establish school – Duties 
of local authority – Fundamental duties – Duty of parents and 
guardian – Constitution of India – Arts.21A, 51A(k) – Right to 
Education:
Held: Constitution declares elementary education as a fundamental 
right, as against many other liberties, which are in the nature of 
fundamental freedoms – The consequence of identifying the right 
to elementary education as a positive right is the recognition of 
co-relative duties and identification of five duty bearers, being 
(i) the appropriate government, (ii) the local authority, (iii) the 
neighbourhood schools, (iv) the parents/guardians, and (v) the 
primary school teachers – Obligations and duties of the duty 
bearers, highlighted. [Paras 6-6.5]
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – s.12 – Extent of school’s responsibility for free and 
compulsory education – Constitutional philosophy & mandate 
of s.12 – Two foundational constitutional values:
Held: Not less than twenty-five percent of the strength of an entry-
level class shall be reserved for and filled by children belonging to 
“weaker sections” and “disadvantaged groups”, who are thereby 
guaranteed access to free elementary education – Such children 
are to be admitted to unaided schools in their neighbourhood, 
thereby embedding within the statutory framework the principle that 
the constitutional promise of education under Article 21A is to be 
realised through common local schools rather than segregated or 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
171
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
parallel systems – The legislative choice to implement the right to 
free and compulsory education through neighbourhood schools is 
not merely administrative; it is a deliberate constitutional strategy 
to operationalise equality of status, dignity, and social integration 
among children in their formative years – In sustaining s.12, the 
Supreme Court has recognised that the rights of children carry 
corresponding obligations on the State to “respect, protect and 
fulfill” those rights and to regulate private educational institutions 
so that children’s rights are not violated even in non-State spheres. 
[Para 7]
Constitution of India – Article 21A – Right to Education – Right 
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 – 
Scheme of the Act:
Held: Statutory design is normatively ambitious – It envisages 
elementary education for all children, across the spectrum of class, 
caste, gender and economic position, in a shared institutional 
space  – s.12 seeks to concretises the constitutional principle 
of fraternity alongside equality and liberty – The 25% inclusion 
u/s.12, in unaided neighbourhood schools, is not an isolated 
welfare measure but a vehicle through which the constitutional 
commitment to fraternity and the “development of the child” as 
recognised in Article 21A and Article 39(f) is sought to be realized. 
[Para 8]
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009 – s.12 – Extent of school’s responsibility for free 
and compulsory education – “neighbourhood schools” – 
Emphasis on “neighbourhood schools” is rooted in the 
National System of Education, as elaborated in the Kothari 
Commission Report, which recommended a Common 
School System whereby all children, irrespective of social or 
economic background, would attend the same neighbourhood 
schools and learn together in an integrated, non-segregated 
environment:
Held: This model envisages the school as a common civic space 
that breaks down barriers of caste, class and gender, and thereby 
advances substantive equality and social justice – Policy rationale 
underlying s.12, stated. [Para 9]

172
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Constitution of India – Article 21A – Right to Education – Right 
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 – 
s.12 – Role of judiciary:
Held: Ensuring admission of at least twenty-five percent of 
class strength in unaided schools with children of weaker and 
disadvantaged groups is certainly a national mission – Effective 
implementation of the statutory policy will be transformative and, 
in this regard, each one, be it the institution or an individual, be 
it the Central or the State Governments, Advisory Councils or 
Commissions are duty bearers – The most important role is of 
the neighbourhood schools and its teachers – In this mission, 
the judiciary also bears the burden to ensure that the process 
of admission is easily accessible, effective and efficient – 
Court must also ensure that judicial remedies against inaction 
or inefficiency are redressed effectively and expeditiously. 
[Para 10]
List of Acts
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009; 
Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005; Constitution 
of India.
List of Keywords
Right under Article 21A, Constitution of India; Right to Education; 
Section 12, Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009; Free and compulsory elementary education; “neighbourhood 
school” to admit children belonging to weaker and disadvantaged 
sections of our society, to the extent of twenty-five percent of the 
class strength; National and State Commissions for Protection of 
Child Rights; “neighbourhood schools”; Appropriate Government; 
Local authority to establish school; National System of Education; 
Kothari Commission Report.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Special Leave Petition (Civil) 
No. 10105 of 2017
From the Judgment and Order dated 20.12.2016 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay at Nagpur in WP No. 6415 of 2016

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
173
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Varinder Kumar Sharma.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, A.S.G., Omkar Deshpande, Siddharth 
Dharmadhikari, Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, Shrirang B. Varma, 
Bhuvan Kapoor, Mili Baxi, Rajesh Singh Chauhan, Padmesh 
Mishra, Ms. Neelakshi Bhadauria, Sudarshan Lamba, Amit Gupta, 
Ms. Muskan Nagpal, Prannv Dhawan, M/s Mitter & Mitter Co.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
1.	
The obligation of a “neighbourhood school” to admit children belonging 
to weaker and disadvantaged sections of our society, to the extent 
of twenty-five percent of the class strength, under Section 12 of the 
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 20091 has 
the extraordinary capacity to transform the social structure of our 
society. Earnest implementation can truly be transformative. It is not 
only a step towards educating young India, but also a substantive 
measure in securing the preambular objective of ‘equality of status’. 
The constitutional declaration of the right under Article 21A, followed 
by the statutory mandate under Section 3 of the Act for free and 
compulsory elementary education can be realised only with effective 
implementation of the provisions of the Act. We have held that 
ensuring admission of such students must be a national mission and 
an obligation of the appropriate government and the local authority. 
Equally, Courts, be it constitutional or civil, must walk that extra mile 
to provide easy access and efficient relief to parents who complain 
of denial of the right. 
2.	
We need not refer to the detailed facts of the case as by the time 
our attention was drawn to this special leave petition, the time within 
which effective relief could be granted to the petitioner had long 
passed. The petitioner had approached a ‘neighbourhood school’ for 
admitting his children for free and compulsory elementary education 
1	
Hereinafter referred to as the Act.

174
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
way back in 2016. It is his case that, even though information through 
RTI indicated that seats were available, the neighbourhood school 
did not respond. Therefore, he was compelled to approach the High 
Court by filing a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution. 
However, by the order impugned before us, the High Court turned 
back the petitioner on the ground that, “the petitioner had failed to 
take up appropriate steps to admit his kids in the free education 
quota, the petitioner must blame himself.” The “appropriate steps” 
that the High Court was referring to pertained to the alleged failure 
to apply as per the online procedure for filling up the twenty-five 
percent seats for children of weaker and disadvantaged sections. 
This is despite the fact that the primary education officer of the Zila 
Parishad, Gondia had addressed a letter to the Deputy Education 
Officer to admit petitioner’s children, though online procedure had not 
been followed, as his house is within 3 kms of the neighbourhood 
school and also that he comes from a very poor family. Further, the 
petitioner had also placed before the authorities RTI information that 
648 seats are still lying vacant. 
3.	
Unfortunately, the Special Leave Petition against the High Court’s 
order has been pending in this Court for a long time without 
appropriate orders and many years have passed by. The standard 
submission that we hear at the Bar, when such unfortunate cases 
are called for hearing is that– “the matter has become infructuous”. 
Sadly, this is true for the purpose of decision making on the facts 
of this case. However, in order to ensure that this situation shall not 
revisit parents like the petitioner again and again, we considered it 
appropriate to take up the case for precedent making and decided 
to examine the efficiency and effectiveness of the procedures for 
complying with the mandate of Section 12. We, therefore, appointed 
Shri Senthil Jagadeesan, learned senior counsel, as the amicus 
curiae to assist the Court. 
4.	
The learned amicus curiae has brought to our notice the inaccessibility 
of twenty-five percent of class strength in a neighbourhood school 
to children belonging to weaker and disadvantaged groups under 
Section 12 for multifarious reasons. He would submit that the online 
application process to access the Right under Section 12 ignores 
the prevalent digital illiteracy. Apart from that, he also highlighted 
the language barrier and lack of help-desks to assist the parents/

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
175
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
guardians. In addition to this, lack of information about the availability 
of seats, absence of transparency in the admission process and 
uncertainty about the forums for redressal of grievances are some 
of the issues highlighted by the learned amicus curiae. Before we 
deal with the text of Section 12, which we will in due course, it is 
also necessary to examine the context in which it is located in the 
scheme of the Act and the constitutional mandate.
A True Understanding of the Fundamental Right to Education.
5.	
Article 21A declares the fundamental right to free and compulsory 
education of all children of the age of 6 to 14 years.
“Article 21A. Right to Education – The State shall provide 
free and compulsory education to all children of the age 
of six to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, 
by law, determine.”
The obligation that the, “State shall provide free and compulsory 
education in such manner as maybe determined by law”, translates 
into the 2009 legislation, the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Act. 
“Section 3. Right of child to free and compulsory 
education – 
(1) Every child of the age of six to fourteen years, including 
a child referred to in clause (d) or clause (e) of section 2, 
shall have the right to free and compulsory education in 
a neighbourhood school till the completion of his or her 
elementary education.”
6.	
It is important to recognize that the Constitution declares elementary 
education as a fundamental right, as against many other liberties, 
which are in the nature of fundamental freedoms. The consequence 
of identifying the right to elementary education as a positive right 
is the recognition of co-relative duties and identification of five duty 
bearers, being (i) the appropriate government, (ii) the local authority, 
(iii) the neighbourhood schools, (iv) the parents/guardians, and (v) the 
primary school teachers. It is important to highlight the obligations and 
duties of these duty bearers in detail not only for accountability, but 
also to ensure that they have sufficient support from the Government 
and the society. 

176
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
6.1	 The first duty bearer; is the “appropriate Government”. The 
duty of the appropriate Government to establish neighbourhood 
schools is prescribed in Section 6. 
“Section 6. Duty of appropriate Government and 
local authority to establish school - For carrying out 
the provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government 
and the local authority shall establish, within such area 
or limits of neighbourhood, as may be prescribed, a 
school, where it is not so established, within a period 
of three years from the commencement of this Act.”
The financial responsibilities under the Act are shared between 
the Central and the State Governments under Section 7. 
Further duties upon establishing the neighbourhood schools 
are prescribed in Section 8, which inter alia mandate that 
the appropriate government shall, “ensure availability of a 
neighbourhood school as specified in Section 6”.
6.2	 The second duty bearer; is the “local authority”2. To ensure 
implementation of the right at the grassroot level, Section 
9 obligates the local authority to ensure availability of a 
neighbourhood school as specified in Section 6 (Section 
9(b)), maintain records of children up to the age of fourteen 
years (Section 9(d)) and also ensure and monitor admission, 
attendance and completion of elementary education by every 
child residing within its jurisdiction (Section 9(e)). The relevant 
part of Section 9 is as follows - 
“Section 9. Duties of local authority.- Every local 
authority shall—
(b) ensure availability of a neighbourhood school as 
specified in section 6;
(d) maintain records of children up to the age of 
fourteen years residing within its jurisdiction, in such 
manner as may be prescribed;
2	
Section 2(h) -“local authority” means a Municipal Corporation or Municipal Council or Zila Parishad or 
Nagar Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever name called, and includes such other authority or body 
having administrative control over the school or empowered by or under any law for the time being in 
force to function as a local authority in any city, town or village;

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
177
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(e) ensure and monitor admission, attendance and 
completion of elementary education by every child 
residing within its jurisdiction.”
6.3	 The third duty bearer; is the neighbourhood school. Under 
Section 12, a neighbourhood school is impressed with the 
responsibility of providing free and compulsory education. 
Section 12 articulates the responsibility of a neighbourhood 
school in the following terms - 
“Section 12. Extent of school’s responsibility for 
free and compulsory education.- 
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a school,—
(a) specified in sub-clause (i) of clause (n) of 
section 2 shall provide free and compulsory 
elementary education to all children admitted 
therein;
(b) specified in sub-clause (ii) of clause (n) of 
section 2 shall provide free and compulsory 
elementary education to such proportion of 
children admitted therein as its annual recurring 
aid or grants so received bears to its annual 
recurring expenses, subject to a minimum of 
twenty-five per cent.;
(c) specified in sub-clauses (iii) and (iv) of clause 
(n) of section 2 shall admit in class I, to the extent 
of at least twenty-five percent of the strength of 
that class, children belonging to weaker section 
and disadvantaged group in the neighbourhood 
and provide free and compulsory elementary 
education till its completion: 
Provided further that where a school specified 
in clause (n) of section 2 imparts pre-school 
education, the provisions of clauses (a) to (c) 
shall apply for admission to such pre-school 
education.
(2) The school specified in sub-clause (iv) of clause (n) 
of section 2 providing free and compulsory elementary 

178
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
education as specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1) 
shall be reimbursed expenditure so incurred by it to the 
extent of per-child-expenditure incurred by the State, or 
the actual amount charged from the child, whichever 
is less, in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that such reimbursement shall not 
exceed per-child-expenditure incurred by a 
school specified in sub-clause (i) of clause (n) 
of section 2: 
Provided further that where such school 
is already under obligation to provide free 
education to a specified number of children on 
account of it having received any land, building, 
equipment or other facilities, either free of cost 
or at a concessional rate, such school shall not 
be entitled for reimbursement to the extent of 
such obligation.
(3) Every school shall provide such information as 
may be required by the appropriate Government or 
the local authority, as the case may be.”
The definition of ‘School’ takes within its fold any recognised 
school imparting education and includes (i) governmental school, 
(ii) aided school receiving grants, (iii) schools belonging to 
specified categories such as the Kendriya Vidyalaya etc. and 
most importantly, (iv) unaided school not receiving any grants. 
With respect to the specified and unaided schools not receiving 
any grants, Section 12 mandates that the “neighborhood schools” 
shall admit in Class I, to the extent of at least twenty-five percent 
of the strength of that class, children belonging to weaker section 
and disadvantaged group for free and compulsory education. 
We will be examining this obligation of the school under Section 
12(1)(c) in detail. 
6.4	 The fourth duty bearer; is the Parent. This duty is now 
constitutionally recognised in Article 51A(k) of the Constitution. 
“51A. Fundamental duties.- It shall be the duty of every 
citizen of India-

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
179
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities 
for education to his child or, as the case may be, ward 
between the age of six and fourteen years”.
Following the constitutional mandate, Section 10 of the Act 
mandates every parent to perform this pious duty.
“10. Duty of parents and guardian - It shall be the 
duty of every parent or guardian to admit or cause to be 
admitted his or her child or ward, as the case may be, to 
an elementary education in the neighbourhood school.”
6.5	 The fifth duty bearer; is the elementary school teacher. There 
is no human resource or value higher than development of a 
student’s mind and character. Therefore, the elementary school 
teachers have the most important role in nation building and as 
such, they have to be treated with utmost respect and care. A 
society that does not take care of its elementary school teachers 
is bound to fail in securing the constitutional objective.
The Constitutional Philosophy & Mandate of Section 12.
7.	
It is necessary to underscore two foundational constitutional values 
that Section 12 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory 
Education Act, 2009 (RTE Act) is designed to articulate and secure. 
The first, in unequivocal terms, mandates that not less than twenty-five 
percent of the strength of an entry-level class shall be reserved for and 
filled by children belonging to “weaker sections” and “disadvantaged 
groups”, who are thereby guaranteed access to free elementary 
education. The second is that such children are to be admitted to 
unaided schools in their neighbourhood, thereby embedding within 
the statutory framework the principle that the constitutional promise 
of education under Article 21A is to be realised through common local 
schools rather than segregated or parallel systems. The legislative 
choice to implement the right to free and compulsory education 
through neighbourhood schools is not merely administrative; it is a 
deliberate constitutional strategy to operationalise equality of status, 
dignity, and social integration among children in their formative years. 
In sustaining Section 12, the Supreme Court has recognised that 
the rights of children carry corresponding obligations on the State 
to “respect, protect and fulfill” those rights and to regulate private 
educational institutions so that children’s rights are not violated even 
in non-State spheres.

180
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
8.	
Properly understood, this statutory design is normatively ambitious. It 
envisages elementary education for all children, across the spectrum 
of class, caste, gender and economic position, in a shared institutional 
space. It makes it possible, normatively and structurally, for the child 
of a multi-millionaire or even of a Judge of the Supreme Court of 
India to sit in the same classroom and at the same bench as the 
child of an autorickshaw driver or a street vendor. This is the manner 
in which Section 12 seeks to concretise the constitutional principle 
of fraternity alongside equality and liberty. A correct appreciation 
of fraternity must displace the traditional but mistaken view, often 
repeated in constitutional discourse, that it is not an enforceable 
value. Our constitutional jurisprudence compels us to read fraternity 
as a value requiring the State to structure institutions that nurture 
co-existence, mutual respect, and a sense of common membership. 
Unlike equality and liberty, which are frequently framed as individual 
rights-claims, fraternity is relational; it operates through institutional 
arrangements that enable individuals to “lose suspect identities” 
based on caste, class or other hierarchies and to form solidaristic 
bonds. In this sense, the 25% inclusion under Section 12, in unaided 
neighbourhood schools, is not an isolated welfare measure but a 
vehicle through which the constitutional commitment to fraternity 
and the “development of the child” as recognised in Article 21A and 
Article 39(f) is sought to be realised.
9.	
The emphasis on “neighbourhood schools” is rooted in the National 
System of Education, as elaborated in the Kothari Commission 
Report, which recommended a Common School System whereby all 
children, irrespective of social or economic background, would attend 
the same neighbourhood schools and learn together in an integrated, 
non-segregated environment. This model envisages the school as 
a common civic space that breaks down barriers of caste, class 
and gender, and thereby advances substantive equality and social 
justice. The neighbourhood common school system under the RTE 
Act envisages that each child must have access to a neighbourhood 
school and such a system is central to the project of democratising 
schooling and reducing entrenched social inequalities. The policy 
rationale underlying Section 12 of the RTE Act is evident from the 
following statement of the Ministry of Human Resource Development; 
“The idea that schooling should act as a means of social 
cohesion and inclusion is not new; it has been oft repeated. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
181
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
Inequitable and disparate schooling reinforces existing 
social and economic hierarchies, and promotes in the 
educated sections of society an indifference towards the 
plight of the poor.
The currently used term ‘inclusive’ education implies, as did 
earlier terms like ‘common’ and ‘neighbourhood’ schools, 
that children from different backgrounds and with varying 
interests and ability will achieve their highest potential if 
they study in a shared classroom environment. The idea 
of inclusive schooling is also consistent with Constitutional 
values and ideals, especially with the ideals of fraternity, 
social justice and equality of opportunity.
For children of socio-economically weaker backgrounds to 
feel at home in private schools, it is necessary that they 
form a substantial proportion or critical mass in the class 
they join. The relevant universe in which the proportion 
needs to be considered is the class/section. It is for this 
reason that the RTE Act provides for admission of 25% 
children from disadvantaged groups and weaker sections 
in class I only. This implies that these children cannot be 
pooled together in a separate section or afternoon shift. 
Any arrangement which segregates, or treats these children 
in a differentiated manner vis-à-vis the fee-paying children 
will be counter-productive.
The rationale for 25% lies in the fact that the composition of 
caste/class indicated in the Census is fairly representative 
of the composition of children who are seeking admission 
under this provision. As per Census 2001, SCs constitute 
16.2%, and STs constitute 8.2% (total 24.4%) of the 
population. Further, the Tendulkar Committee, set up 
by the Planning Commission to measure poverty, has 
estimated the below poverty line (BPL) population to be 
37.2%. It is a fact that much of the population that suffers 
economic deprivation also suffers from social disadvantage. 
Thus, taken together, the figure of 25% for admission of 
children from disadvantaged groups and weaker sections 
is considered reasonable. Any lower proportion would 
jeopardize the long-term goal of the policy which is to 

182
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
strengthen social cohesion and bring out the best human 
resource potential inherent in our society as a whole. A 
smaller proportion would serve only a token purpose, and it 
will run the serious risk of creating the feeling of alienation 
among the children belonging to disadvantaged groups and 
weaker sections. Their participation in classroom interaction 
will be neither strong nor sufficiently manifest to enrich 
the overall experiential learning taking place in any given 
subject area. Only a critical mass can play such a role.
The RTE Act provides for admission of 25% children from 
disadvantaged groups and weaker sections in Class I, 
not across the whole school. As children admitted to 
class I move to class II, new children will be admitted to 
class I, and so on till completion of 8 years of elementary 
education. The rationale for admission in class I only must 
be appreciated in human terms. Teachers who are used to 
a selective, homogeneous classroom environment cannot 
be expected to develop the required positive attitude and 
professional skills to deal with a diversified class overnight. 
The same applies to children. Children who have grown up 
to an age of nine or ten in a homogeneous or segregated 
environment have been socialized into a structure of norms 
and behaviour. They cannot be transformed on demand. 
Also, the overall school ethos cannot be expected to 
respond to a new policy in a positive manner all of a sudden. 
Education is indeed an act of faith and social engineering - 
but not quick-fix social engineering. In view of the fact that 
children take time to socialize and teachers take time to 
develop new attitudes and pedagogic skills, the RTE Act 
provides for admission of disadvantaged and poor children 
at the entry level, covering pre-school and Class I. With 
these children moving up, and a new cohort of children 
entering pre-school and Class I in each successive year, 
the school will gradually have a more diverse population 
spread across all classes. Progression at this pace will allow 
children the opportunity to grow up together and create 
bonds: bonds that can survive social walls. Progression at 
this pace can allow the school to develop the professional 
capacity to respond to the intellectual and emotional needs 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
183
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
of children from diverse backgrounds. Children who are 
younger than eight years of age are yet to develop a 
stable social identity. Their values are still forming, and 
their motivation to derive meaning from experience, both 
concrete and social is very strong. Therefore, it is a valid 
argument that the policy of mixing children from different 
socio-economic strata has the best chance of succeeding 
if it starts from the formative years of nursery/kindergarten 
and Class I. Diversity enhances learning and development, 
while segregation impoverishes the classroom environment 
of all schools, private or government.
Admission of 25% children from disadvantaged groups 
and weaker sections in the neighbourhood is not merely 
to provide avenues of quality education to poor and 
disadvantaged children. The larger objective is to provide 
a common place where children sit, eat and live together 
for at least eight years of their lives across caste, class 
and gender divides in order that it narrows down such 
divisions in our society. The other objective is that the 75% 
children who have been lucky to come from better endowed 
families, learn through their interaction with the children 
from families who haven’t had similar opportunities, but are 
rich in knowledge systems allied to trade, craft, farming 
and other services, and that the pedagogic enrichment of 
the 75% children is provided by such intermingling. This 
will of course require classroom practices, teacher training, 
etc. to constantly bring out these pedagogic practices, 
rather than merely make children from these two sections 
sit together. The often voiced concern about how the 25% 
children from disadvantaged groups and weaker sections 
can cope in an environment where rich children exist 
can be resolved when the teaching learning process and 
teachers use these children as sources of knowledge so 
that their esteem and recognition goes up and they begin 
to be treated as equals.”
10.	 Our concern is about the effective, rather, the ineffective implementation 
of the mandate under Section 12 of the Act. We have to ensure 
admission of at least twenty-five percent of class strength in unaided 
schools with children of weaker and disadvantaged groups. This is 

184
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
certainly a national mission. Effective implementation of the statutory 
policy will be transformative and, in this regard, each one of us, 
be it the institution or an individual, be it the Central or the State 
Governments, Advisory Councils or Commissions are duty bearers. 
The most important role is of the neighbourhood schools and its 
teachers. In this mission, the judiciary also bears the burden to 
ensure that the process of admission is easily accessible, effective 
and efficient. Court must also ensure that judicial remedies against 
inaction or inefficiency are redressed effectively and expeditiously. It 
is in this context that we have examined the procedure and practice 
for implementing Section 12 of the Act.
11.	 Considering the importance of implementing the purpose and object 
of the Act, Parliament has assigned the task of reviewing, monitoring 
and redressing the grievances arising under the Act to the National 
and State Commissions for Protection of Child Rights3 under Section 
31 of the Act.
“Section 31. Monitoring of child’s right to education.—
(1) The National Commission for Protection of Child Rights 
constituted under section 3, or, as the case may be, the 
State Commission for Protection of Child Rights constituted 
under section 17, of the Commissions for Protection of 
Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006), shall, in addition to the 
functions assigned to them under that Act, also perform 
the following functions, namely:— 
(a) examine and review the safeguards for rights provided 
by or under this Act and recommend measures for their 
effective implementation; 
(b) inquire into complaints relating to child’s right to free 
and compulsory education; and
(c) take necessary steps as provided under sections 15 
and 24 of the said Commissions for Protection of Child 
Rights Act. 
(2) The said Commissions shall, while inquiring into any 
matters relating to child’s right to free and compulsory 
3	
Hereinafter referred to as “the NCPCR” and “the SCPCRs”.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
185
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
education under clause (c) of sub-section (1), have the 
same powers as assigned to them respectively under 
sections 14 and 24 of the said Commissions for Protection 
of Child Rights Act. 
(3) Where the State Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights has not been constituted in a State, the appropriate 
Government may, for the purpose of performing the 
functions specified in clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (1), 
constitute such authority, in such manner and subject to 
such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed.”
12.	 The Commissions are established under Sections 3 and 17 of the 
Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005. In exercise of its 
statutory duty, NCPCR issued Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
for implementation of Section 12(1)(c) of the Act. The preamble of 
the SOP is as follows:
“Through the redressal of grievances and feedback during 
different formal and informal meetings/consultations, it 
came to NCPCR’s notice that different mechanism and 
modalities are being followed by the States/UTs based on 
their interpretation of the said provision. To examine the 
compliance of the above-mentioned clause in true spirit and 
to understand ground reality NCPCR undertook a study on 
implementation of the provision in private unaided schools 
of Delhi. The findings of the study revealed challenges 
faced by all stakeholders involved specially the children 
and parents. Most importantly, it helped to discover the 
issues right from the process of admission to the inclusion 
of children admitted under this section in the school. 
Consequently, the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) 
for Implementation of Section 12(1)(c) of the RTE Act, 2009 
has been developed to present a systematic mechanism/
procedure to be followed by the State Governments in 
making the entire process streamlined and transparent.”
13.	 Learned amicus curiae also brought to our notice SOP for Delhi and 
the relevant rules for the State of Maharashtra. He has also placed 
on record certain other material having a direct bearing on the issue 
under consideration. A statement of joint suggestions made by the 
amicus curiae and the learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) is 

186
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
also placed before us, highlighting the concerns and identifying areas 
requiring improvement. The issues and suggestions are as follows: 
(i)	
Implementation of Section 12 by the States/UTs and providing 
online portal for admission: Presently, all States and Union 
Territories have neither implemented the mandate of Section 
12, nor established a portal dedicated to ensuring a transparent 
admission process. 
(ii)	
Language: It is suggested that all States and Union Territories 
should provide information in at least three languages – two 
being the official languages (Hindi and English) and the third 
being the local language of the area concerned. 
(iii)	 Information and assistance: Information regarding the admission 
process has to be made available to parents and guardians. 
(iv)	 Transparency: Schools should be directed to publish the number 
of available seats for children belonging to disadvantages 
groups and weaker sections much in advance and before the 
application stage commences.
(v)	
Establishment of help-desks and pro-active assistance during 
the application stage: Either the designated school staff, the 
District Education Officer, the Block Officer, the Block Committee 
Office or the Jan Sewa Kendras must set up help-desks to 
assist parents for completing the application process.
(vi)	 Window for clearance of defects: Instead of simpliciter rejection 
of a defective application, a defect clearance window should 
be established with an assistant to clear mistakes.
(vii)	 Complaints: A redressal mechanism for complaints by parents/
guardians should be set up and the grievances must be resolved 
within strict timelines.
(viii)	 Transparency in denial of admissions: Denial of admissions 
should be recorded and uploaded with reasons and the same 
should be reviewed by the Block Education Officer within 72 
hours. 
(ix)	 Training: Training must be imparted to prevent discrimination 
of children belonging to disadvantaged groups and weaker 
sections.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
187
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
14.	 The suggestions of the learned amicus curiae and the learned ASG, 
seen in the context of SOP issued by NCPCR may be restated. In 
fact, NCPCR’s SOP is structured in three stages, (i) the first relates 
to the preparatory stage, (ii) the second stage relates to processing 
applications, selection and admission and (iii) the third stage relates 
to procedure after completion of admission. To ensure a smooth 
and transparent admission process and in order to enable eligible 
children to access the right of admission under Section 12(1)(c), the 
following steps should be taken –
14.1	 Preparatory Stage
(i)	
Finalization of seats: The schools should be given 20 
working days to submit the requisite data of the declared 
strength for purpose of Section 12(1)(c).
(ii)	
Advertisement: Appropriate Government and local 
authority should advertise the schedule of admission 
under Section 12(1)(c) in print and electronic media as 
well as locally used medium of broadcasting/publicising 
important announcements, especially in rural areas. This 
shall contain all the essential information regarding the 
admission process.
(iii)	
Schedule of admission: A calendar for admission 
under Section 12(1)(c) shall be scheduled in such a 
manner that the admission process is completed before 
beginning of admission of children under DG/EWS 
category. This is to be done at least two months from 
the commencement of the next academic year.
(iv)	
Centralized online system: The appropriate Government 
shall develop centralized online portal for admission 
under Section 12(1)(c). The joint suggestions recognize 
the existence of digital illiteracy and have suggested 
that the process must be accessible with the aid of 
help-desks etc., to bridge the gap of digital divide.
(v)	
Criteria: for determining children belonging to 
disadvantaged groups and weaker sections must have 
clarity and simplicity.

188
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(vi)	
Documents: The requirement of documents necessary 
for processing the application for admission must be 
clearly mentioned.
(vii)	
Information about the school: It is necessary to ensure 
that the school is fully prepared and ready to undertake 
the process of admission effectively and efficiently. Public 
awareness in the local area about the admission process 
is necessary. The school as well as local authority have 
an obligation to disseminate this information.
(viii)	 Dispute settlement: Dispute Settlements Committees 
must be set up and their availability must be made 
known.
14.2	 Processing Applications, Selection and Admission
(i)	
Help-desks: The local authority, respective neighbourhood 
schools and non-governmental organisations shall set 
up help-desks for free of cost facilitation of parents/
guardian in filling the form on the online portal and other 
connected steps. For this purpose, assistance under 
the Common Service Centres Scheme shall also be 
made readily available. 
(ii)	
Selection criteria: The criteria employed for giving 
preference to one applicant over the another and the 
process of draw of lots shall be laid out in simple and 
clear terms, and it must be widely published. 
(iii)	
Scrutiny of applications: Scrutiny of applications shall 
be carried out by zonal/local teams, as directed to be 
constituted as per SOP notified by the GNCTD of Delhi 
dated 02.01.2025, instead of private unaided recognized 
schools.
(iv)	
Window for correction of defects: No application shall 
be summarily rejected on the ground of deficiency of 
required documents without first giving an opportunity 
for correction. For this purpose, a set timeline and 
procedure for providing window of correction shall be 
prescribed, taking specific guidance from the NCPCR’s 
SOP in this regard. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
189
Dinesh Biwaji Ashtikar v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(v)	
Dispute resolution: Easy and effective mechanism for 
dispute resolution under Section 32 or by the Dispute 
Settlement Committee must be formulated. 
14.3	 After Completion of Admission Process
(i)	
Speaking order: The outcome of selection must be 
published through a speaking order. 
(ii)	
Admission process: The online portal shall notify school-
wise list of children selected. An updated record of the 
children taking admission must be maintained.
(iii)	
Initiation of inquiry: The authorities must monitor and 
keep a constant watch. In case there is a trend noticed 
with respect to reserved seats going vacant in a specific 
school, the causes must be enquired into.
(iv)	
Post-admission: The basic essentials for effective 
inclusion post admission must be undertaken.
(v)	
Reimbursement: Per-Child Expenditure reimbursement 
must be done without delay.
(vi)	
Finality of selection: The admitted children shall not 
be subjected to any further scrutiny by the respective 
schools. 
15.	 The above referred procedure, as indicated in the SOP issued by 
NCPCR, is only in the nature of guidelines. These guidelines do 
not partake the character of enforceable rules, violation of which 
would render the duty bearers answerable to the reviewing or 
controlling authority. Uncertainty about the obligation to comply with 
the requirements would also make judicial review complicated. We 
are of the opinion that it is necessary and compelling to formulate 
subordinate legislation by issuing necessary rules and regulations, 
prescribing the method and manner by which children of weaker 
and disadvantaged sections are to be admitted in neighbourhood 
schools. Without such enforceable rules and regulations, the object 
of Article 21A and the statutory policy under Section 12(1)(c) would 
be a dead letter. 
16.	 In view of the above, we direct the appropriate authorities to prepare 
and issue, in consultation with the NCPCR and SCPCRs, as the 

190
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
case may be, as well as the National and State Advisory Councils, 
necessary rules and regulations under Section 38 of the Act for 
implementing the mandate of Section 12(1)(c) of the Act. 
16.1	 We direct that the NCPCR, New Delhi shall be impleaded as 
a party respondent. The copy of our order shall be sent to the 
Commission for compliance and monitoring. 
16.2	 We further direct the Commission to collate information about 
the issuance of rules and regulations by the appropriate 
Governments of the States and Union Territories and file an 
affidavit before this Court by 31st of March, 2026. 
16.3	 List this Special Leave Petition for further hearing on 6th of 
April, 2026. 
Result of the case: Special Leave Petition to be listed for further 
hearing.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
