[2026] 2 S.C.R. 47 : 2026 INSC 22 
Golden Food Products India 
v.
State of Uttar Pradesh & Others 
(Civil Appeal No(s). 56-57 of 2026)
06 January 2026
[B.V. Nagarathna* and R. Mahadevan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
The authority conducting the auction expected a higher bid than 
what the highest bidder had bid, whether it can be a reason to 
discard the highest bid.
Headnotes†
Auction – Ghaziabad Development Authority (GDA)-respondent 
no.2 herein had advertised the allotment of various plots 
through an auction – On 15.03.2024, an open auction was 
conducted in which the reserve price of the subject plot was 
fixed at Rs.25,600/- per sq. mtr. – The appellant submitted a bid 
of Rs.29,500/- per sq. mtr., which was the highest, and was thus 
declared the highest bidder – However, later respondent found 
that the GDA–respondent no.2 had cancelled the allotment – 
Thereafter, on 22.05.2024, the GDA-respondent no.2 officially 
notified the appellant that they had cancelled their financial 
bid and announced that a fresh auction would take place for 
the plot – Since it noticed that “similar properties” in the same 
scheme had received substantially higher prices than offered 
by the appellant – Writ petition filed by the appellant before 
the High Court was dismissed – The High Court held that the 
appellant cannot claim an “indefeasible right” to insist upon 
the execution of a sale deed in its favour – Later, appellant filed 
another writ petition, which was also dismissed – Correctness:
Held: An auction process has a sanctity attached to it and only for 
valid reasons that the highest bid can be discarded in an auction 
which is otherwise held in accordance with law – If a valid bid has 
been made which is above the reserve price, there should be a 
rationale or reason for not accepting it – Therefore, the decision 
to discard the highest bid must have a nexus to the rationale or 
the reason – Merely because the authority conducting the auction 
expected a higher bid than what the highest bidder had bid cannot 
* Author

48
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
be a reason to discard the highest bid – In the instant case, no 
other party had placed a bid higher than the appellant herein – 
There was no infirmity in the conduct of the auction – No other 
party had complained about the process of auction conducted 
by the GDA-respondent no.2 – The bid offered by the appellant 
herein was the highest and above the reserve price – In the 
circumstances, the said bid ought to have been accepted by GDA-
respondent no.2 rather than cancelling the same without notice to 
the appellant herein – Hence, the cancellation of the bid submitted 
by the appellant herein is quashed – The impugned orders of 
the High Court dated 24.05.2024 and 15.07.2024 passed in the 
respective writ petitions are set-aside – The appellant is directed to 
re-deposit the earnest money – After the re-deposit of the earnest 
money, the GDA-respondent no.2 shall make an order of allotment 
of the subject plot in favour of the appellant herein and take all 
consequential steps for concluding the auction process in favour 
of the appellant herein. [Para 33]
Case Law Cited
Eva Agro Feeds (P) Ltd. v. Punjab National Bank [2023] 13 SCR 
861 : (2023) 10 SCC 189; Tata Motors Ltd. v. Brihan Mumbai Electric 
Supply & Transport Undertaking [2023] 6 SCR 695 : (2023) 19 
SCC 1; K. Kumara Gupta v. Sri Markendaya & Sri Omkareswara 
Swamy Temple [2022] 8 SCR 968 : (2022) 5 SCC 710; Haryana 
Urban Development Authority v. Orchid Infrastructure Developers 
(P) Ltd. [2017] 1 SCR 847 : (2017) 4 SCC 243; Rajasthan Housing 
Board v. G.S. Investments [2006] Supp. 7 SCR 868 : (2007) 1 SCC 
477; State of Orissa v. Harinarayan Jaiswal [1972] 3 SCR 784 : 
(1972) 2 SCC 36; Uttar Pradesh Avas Evam Vikas Parishad v. Om 
Prakash Sharma [2013] 6 SCR 199 : (2013) 5 SCC 182; Meerut 
Development Authority v. Association of Management Studies 
[2009] 6 SCR 663 : (2009) 6 SCC 171; Indore Vikas Praadhikaran 
(IDA) v. Shri Humud Jain Samaj Trust, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3511; 
M.P. Power Management Company Limited v. Sky Power Southeast 
Solar India (Private) Limited [2022] 5 SCR 1 : (2023) 2 SCC 703; 
Nagar Nigam, Meerut v. Al Faheem Meat Exports (P) Ltd. [2006] 
Supp. 10 SCR 354 : (2006) 13 SCC 382; Subodh Kumar Singh 
Rathour v. Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority [2024] 7 
SCR 532 : (2024) 15 SCC 461 – referred to.
List of Acts
Constitution of India.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
49
Golden Food Products India v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others
List of Keywords
Auction; Sanctity of Auctions; Bid; Cancellation of bid; Revenue 
Maximization; Indefeasible Right; Doctrine of Non-Arbitrariness; 
Reserve Price; Irrelevant Considerations; Reasoned Order; Plot Size 
Disparity; Earnest Money Deposit; Madhuban Bapudham Yojana.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No(s). 56-57 
of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.07.2024 and 24.05.2024 
of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad in WC Nos. 20059 
and 17883 of 2024, respectively
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Vipin Sanghi, Sr. Adv., Siddharth Praveen Acharya, Aditya Bhati, 
Lakshay Sharma, Bhuvnesh Vyas.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Malak Manish Bhatt, Ms. Sukanya Joshi.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Nagarathna, J.
Leave granted.
2.	
The present appeals have been filed against the following impugned 
final orders passed by the Allahabad High Court:
a)	
Final order dated 24.05.2024 passed in Writ C No.17883/2024 
(for short, “Impugned Order No.1”); and
b)	
Final order dated 15.07.2024 passed in Writ C No.20059/2024 
(for short, “Impugned Order No.2”),
whereby the High Court dismissed the aforesaid writ petitions.
3.	
In brief, the facts of the case are that the Ghaziabad Development 
Authority (“GDA”) – respondent No.2 herein had advertised the 

50
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
allotment of various plots through an auction dated 25.08.2023, 
including an industrial plot bearing Plot No.26, Madhuban Bapudham 
Yojana, Ghaziabad, measuring an area of 3150 square metres (“the 
plot”, in question). The auction was conducted through a two-bid 
system – a ‘technical bid’ and a ‘financial bid’.
4.	
On 02.02.2024, the appellant submitted separate technical and financial 
bids. In the financial bid, the appellant submitted an offer of Rs.25,920/- 
per square metre, and deposited a demand draft of Rs.80,64,000/- as 
earnest money. On 14.03.2024, the GDA - respondent No.2 notified 
the appellant that their technical bid had been approved. Subsequently, 
on 15.03.2024, an open auction was conducted in which the reserve 
price of the plot was fixed at Rs.25,600/- per square metre. There 
were only two bidders in the auction, including the appellant. The 
appellant submitted a bid of Rs.29,500/- per square metre, which was 
the highest, and was thus declared the highest bidder. 
5.	
Thereafter, on 25.04.2024, the appellant preferred a representation 
addressed to the Vice-Chairman of the GDA - respondent No.2, 
requesting issuance of an allotment letter for the said plot. On not 
receiving any reply, the appellant filed an RTI Application bearing 
Diary No.33697/RTI/2024, asking GDA - respondent No.2 to furnish 
internal note sheets and memos of the appellant’s bid. However, 
upon going to the office of GDA - respondent No.2 to inspect the 
same, they found that the GDA - respondent No.2 had cancelled the 
allotment. Thereafter, on 22.05.2024, the GDA - respondent No.2 
officially notified the appellant that they had cancelled their financial 
bid and announced that a fresh auction would take place for the plot.
6.	
According to the GDA - respondent No.2, upon comparing the price 
received for the plot in question with the prices received for “similar 
properties” under the Madhuban Bapudham Yojana in the financial 
year 2023-24, it found that the following prices were received:
Type of 
Property
Area (in 
square 
metre)
Reserve Price 
(per square 
metre)
Date of 
Sale
Selling Price 
(per square 
metre)
Industrial Plot
131.90
Rs.25,600/-
25.08.2023
Rs.83,500/-
Industrial Plot
123.83
Rs.25,600/-
25.08.2023
Rs.82,000/-
Industrial Plot
123.92
Rs.25,600/-
25.08.2023
Rs.82,000/-
Industrial Plot
132.20
Rs.25,600/-
25.08.2023
Rs.1,21,000 /-

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
51
Golden Food Products India v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others
7.	
Therefore, since it noticed that “similar properties” in the same 
scheme had received substantially higher prices than offered by the 
appellant in its bid, the auction committee recommended cancelling 
the appellant’s bid in order to conduct a fresh auction. This decision 
was approved by the Vice-Chairman of GDA - respondent No.2. 
Following this, the appellant was notified of the decision and its 
earnest money deposit was refunded.
8.	
Aggrieved, the appellant approached the Allahabad High Court 
through Writ C No.17883/2024, seeking a writ of mandamus directing 
the GDA - respondent No.2 to issue an allotment letter in favour 
of the appellant and also execute a sale deed with respect to the 
plot. By Impugned Order No.1 dated 24.05.2024, the High Court 
dismissed the Writ Petition, taking on record the submission of the 
GDA - respondent No.2 that the appellant’s financial bid was lower 
than the bids for other plots in the same scheme and holding that 
the appellant cannot claim an “indefeasible right” to insist upon the 
execution of a sale deed in its favour.
9.	
The appellant again approached the High Court through Writ C 
No.20059/2024, seeking that the letter dated 22.05.2024, by which 
the GDA - respondent No.2 informed them of the non-acceptance 
of their financial bid, be quashed. In addition, the appellant sought 
directions to issue an allotment letter in its favour, as well as execute 
a sale deed in respect of the plot. By Impugned Order No.2 dated 
15.07.2024, the High Court held that in the absence of a challenge 
to its order dated 24.05.2024, the same had attained finality as the 
appellant had not preferred any modification or review of the same. 
In addition, letter dated 22.05.2024 was sent prior to the order dated 
24.05.2024 and leave was granted to the appellant to participate in 
a fresh auction conducted by the GDA - respondent No.2. Therefore, 
the said Writ Petition was deemed to be misconceived and hence 
dismissed. Aggrieved, the appellant preferred SLP (C) Nos.18095-
18096 of 2024, before this Court, challenging Impugned Order Nos.1 
and 2, which have been converted into the Civil Appeals that arise 
for our consideration.
Submissions:
10.	 We have heard learned senior counsel Sri Sanghi for the appellant 
and learned counsel for the respondents. We have perused the 
material on record.

52
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
11.	 Learned senior counsel for the appellant Sri Sanghi submitted that 
the respondents arbitrarily cancelled the appellant’s bid on the ground 
that the quoted rate was allegedly lower than the rates fetched for 
smaller plots of different dimensions in the same scheme. However, 
this ground was not mentioned in the auction brochure and was only 
disclosed after the appellant filed multiple RTI applications. The RTI 
replies reveal that the appellant’s technical bid was valid and that 
his price bid was the highest. The decision to cancel the bid for “low 
rates compared to smaller plots” was an extraneous and arbitrary 
consideration.
12.	 The appellant also submitted that the replies to his RTI applications 
establish that he had complied with all tender conditions and had 
validly deposited the required earnest money. The cancellation of the 
appellant’s bid amounts to rewriting the tender after the bids were 
opened, which is not permitted in law. It is contrary to Article 14 of 
the Constitution of India as it is arbitrary, for a statutory authority to 
cancel a valid bid on grounds that were not mentioned in the auction 
brochure. That comparing the appellant’s bid with dissimilar plots 
(which were smaller) amounts to imposing new tender conditions 
after the auction. Our attention was drawn to the decision of this 
Court in Eva Agro Feeds (P) Ltd. vs. Punjab National Bank, 
(2023) 10 SCC 189 (“Eva Agro Feeds”) in which a two-judge 
bench of this Court (B.V. Nagarathna and Ujjal Bhuyan, JJ.) held 
that “…mere expectation of the Liquidator that a still higher price 
may be obtained can be no good ground to cancel an otherwise 
valid auction and go for another round of auction. Such a cause of 
action would not only lead to incurring of avoidable expenses but 
also erode the credibility of the auction process itself”. The appellant 
submitted that this principle applies in the present case, where the 
auction was cancelled arbitrarily because of a ground that was not 
provided in the brochure.
13.	 The RTI responses show that an adjacent plot of the same scheme 
was allotted without any benchmarking against smaller plots. Further, 
they show that the GDA - respondent No.2 allotted several plots above 
2000 square metres at prices only marginally above the reserve 
price. In contrast, the appellant’s bid was a full 15.23% above the 
reserve price (Rs.29,500/- as against Rs.25,600/-). Therefore, the 
respondent’s treatment of the appellant was inconsistent, selective 
and arbitrary.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
53
Golden Food Products India v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others
14.	 The appellant further submitted that the High Court, in its impugned 
orders, failed to appreciate the difference between an ‘indefeasible 
right to allotment’, and the ‘right to fair and non-arbitrary treatment’. In 
the present case, the respondents cancelled the allotment without a 
show-cause notice or hearing, which violates the principles of natural 
justice. It was contended that simply returning the earnest money 
deposited cannot legitimise an arbitrary cancellation.
15.	 Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that 
participation in a tender or auction does not confer any vested/ 
enforceable right to obtain the bid. Unless the auctioning authority 
accepts the bid and communicates the same, the highest bid is 
only an offer, which is revocable at the authority’s discretion. In this 
case, no letter of acceptance or allotment was ever issued to the 
appellant. On the contrary, the earnest money deposit was returned, 
thereby extinguishing any semblance of a contractual relationship. 
The appellant cannot compel the execution of a sale deed. The 
reasons for cancellation were also communicated, which means that 
the decision was not arbitrary.
16.	 Further, the respondents also submitted that judicial review in 
matters pertaining to tender processes is limited. In this regard, our 
attention was drawn to the decision of a three-Judge Bench of this 
Court in Tata Motors Ltd. vs. Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply & 
Transport Undertaking, (2023) 19 SCC 1, wherein it was observed 
that “courts should not use a magnifying glass while scanning the 
tenders and make every small mistake appear like a big blunder. In 
fact, the courts must give “fair play in the joints” to the government 
and public sector undertakings in matters of contract”.
17.	 It was submitted that following from this principle, the respondent’s 
decision to cancel the action was based on objective considerations 
(the prevailing market rates and the need for safeguarding public 
revenue). Comparable plots in subsequent auctions had obtained 
significantly higher prices and therefore the decision to re-auction the 
plot in question was a measure intended to maximise public benefit.
18.	 It was further submitted that the tender document expressly stated 
that the decision of the Vice-Chairman/Authority in matters of allotment 
are final and binding. Therefore, the cancellation in the present case 
was not without authority and was within the scope of the tender 
conditions made available to the appellant.

54
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Points for Consideration:
a)	
Whether the High Court was right in dismissing the writ petitions 
filed by the appellant herein?
b)	
What Order?
19.	 The undisputed facts of the case are that the GDA - respondent 
No.2 had advertised the allotment of various plots through an 
auction dated 25.08.2023. The appellant’s technical bid as well as 
the financial bid were accepted on 14.03.2024 and on 15.03.2024, 
respectively. The reserve price fixed for the subject plot measuring 
3150 square metres was Rs.25,600/- per square metre and the 
appellant had bid Rs.29,500/- per square metre which was the 
highest bid and therefore the appellant was declared the highest 
bidder. In fact, there were only two bidders in the auction including 
the appellant. Since no further steps were taken by the GDA - 
respondent No.2 in the matter of issuance of allotment letter to the 
appellant herein, steps were taken to ascertain about the same. 
The appellant became aware that the GDA - respondent No.2 had 
cancelled the allotment and had notified the appellant about the 
cancellation only on 22.05.2024. This was done without any prior 
intimation to the appellant. The reason for cancellation according to 
GDA - respondent No.2 was owing to the low bid which was made 
by the appellant herein although it was higher than the reserve 
price. The High Court has accepted the said contention of GDA - 
respondent No.2 and has accordingly dismissed the writ petitions 
filed by the appellant herein. 
20.	 We have considered the arguments advanced at the Bar, in light of 
the facts of this case and the judgments of this Court relied upon 
by the learned counsel for the respective parties. 
21.	 In K. Kumara Gupta vs. Sri Markendaya & Sri Omkareswara 
Swamy Temple, (2022) 5 SCC 710, it was observed by this Court that 
unless and until it was found that there was any material irregularity 
and/or illegality in holding the public auction and/or the auction was 
vitiated by any fraud or collusion, it is not open to set aside the 
auction or sale in favour of the highest bidder on the basis of some 
representation made by a third party who did not even participate 
even in the auction proceedings and did not make any offer. If there is 
repeated interference in the auction process, the object and purpose 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
55
Golden Food Products India v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others
of holding public auction and its sanctity would be frustrated. That 
unless there are allegations of fraud, collusion, etc., the highest 
offer received in the public offer should be accepted as a fair value. 
Otherwise, there shall not be any sanctity of any public auction.
22.	 In Eva Agro Feeds, it was observed that the mere expectation of 
the liquidator (in the said case) which could also mean the auction 
seller that, a still higher price may be obtained can be no good ground 
to cancel an otherwise valid auction and go in for another round of 
auction. Such a course of action would not only lead to incurring of 
avoidable expenses but also erode credibility of the auction process 
itself. Thus, the auctioning authority must adhere to the rule of law 
and an auction cannot be cancelled arbitrarily.
23.	 In the present case, the main contention of learned senior counsel 
for the appellant was that in an arbitrary manner, GDA - respondent 
No.2 cancelled the appellant’s bid on the ground that it was lower 
than the rates fetched for smaller plots of different dimensions of the 
same Scheme. That the technical bid of the appellant was accepted 
and the price quoted by the appellant was Rs.29,500/- per square 
metre which was higher than Rs.25,600/- per square metre which was 
the reserve price. The appellant’s financial bid was also accepted. 
Therefore, the decision to subsequently cancel the financial bid 
of the appellant owing to “a low rate” quoted by the appellant as 
compared to the “other smaller plots” is an arbitrary and extraneous 
reason. That once the auction has been held in accordance with 
law and there had been no fraud, collusion or any other infirmity in 
the holding of the auction and the earnest money has been validly 
deposited, there could not have been any subsequent cancellation 
of the bid. In the instant case, merely because a higher rate could 
have been achieved then what was accepted and declared by the 
auctioning authority could not be the reason for setting aside the 
auction itself. That the price quoted by the appellant herein was 
15.23% above the reserve price. Further, without any issuance of the 
notice to the appellant herein, the financial bid had been cancelled. 
Returning of the earnest money deposited by the appellant herein 
would not legitimize an arbitrary cancellation. Hence, it was contended 
that the impugned orders of the High Court may be set aside and 
a direction may be issued to the respondents herein to issue a 
letter of allotment of the subject plot in the name of the appellant 
herein. 

56
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
24.	 In order to justify the cancellation, learned counsel for GDA - 
respondent No.2 contended that the bid made by the appellant was 
low as compared to bids received in respect of “smaller plots” on the 
very same date. Therefore, the discretion was rightly exercised by 
GDA - respondent No.2 to cancel the financial bid of the appellant 
and return the earnest money.
25.	 As already noted, Rs.25,600/- per square metre was the reserve price 
fixed for the subject plot measuring 3150 square metres which is a 
larger area compared to other smaller plots which also carried the 
same reserve price. Ordinarily when large areas of industrial land 
are auctioned, the overall price would be separately assessed as 
compared to the smaller plots. This is because insofar as the industrial 
plots are concerned, most of the applicants seek allotment of smaller 
plots and the demand for larger plots would be scarce. Since the 
GDA- respondent No.2 intended to auction an area of 3150 square 
metres as one plot which is a large plot, the reserve price was also 
fixed at Rs.25,600/- per square metre. As noted above, that can be 
compared to the reserve price fixed for the smaller plots of land which 
was also Rs.25,600/-. Intentionally, an identical reserve price was 
fixed owing to a lower demand for a larger plot. Otherwise, a higher 
reserve price could have been fixed by the GDA – respondent No.2 
for the subject plot. Merely because the area of plot in the instant 
case was 3150 square metres and it was a larger plot, the reserve 
price could not have been higher. Therefore, the reserve price fixed 
for the smaller plot as well as what has been fixed for the subject 
plot was uniform i.e. Rs.25,600/- per square metre. Therefore, there 
has been a uniformity in the fixing of the reserve price insofar as the 
subject plot as well as the smaller plot is concerned, as is evident 
from the table extracted above which are all under the very same 
Madhuban Bapudham Yojna in the financial year 2023-24. 
26.	 In the instant case, the date of auction of the subject plot was 
25.08.2023 which was the very same date on which the other smaller 
plots were auctioned. Merely because the selling price or the financial 
bids made by the parties vis-à-vis the smaller plots were concerned 
was higher per square metre cannot be a reason to also expect a 
very high price or a similar price insofar as the subject plot measuring 
3150 square metres is concerned. After all, from the table reproduced 
above, it is evident that the smaller plots were measuring between 
123.83 square metres to 132.20 square metres only whereas in the 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
57
Golden Food Products India v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others
instant case the subject plot is a large area of 3150 square metres. 
The subject plot cannot be compared with the smaller plots auctioned 
on that very day. There were only two parties who made their bids in 
respect of the subject plot and the appellant herein was the highest 
bidder. This fact also demonstrates that there were no bidders for 
the said extent of plot as there was no demand for the same unlike 
a demand for smaller plots. GDA - respondent No.2 could not have 
therefore expected to receive a similar rate of bid per square metre 
vis-à-vis a smaller plot insofar as the subject plot is concerned. As 
already noted, the reserve price in respect of the smaller plot as well as 
the subject plot was fixed at the same rate. However, as noted above 
there were only two bidders who bid for the subject plot measuring 
3150 square metres. The demand for smaller plots being more as 
compared to larger plots, naturally the bid amounts were higher for 
smaller plots. There being lesser demand for the subject plot being 
3150 square metres, only two bidders submitted their financial bid 
and the appellant was declared to be the higher bidder.
27.	 Further, the amount of Rs.29,500/- per square metre which was bid 
by the appellant herein was above Rs.25,600/- per square metre 
being the reserve price. Naturally, the appellant was declared to be 
the highest bidder. This is in fact a crystallization of the future rights 
and obligation of the parties. The appellant had a right to receive the 
allotment letter and GDA - respondent No.2 had a duty to issue the 
same, particularly in the absence of fraud, collusion or any other reason 
which could have led to the cancellation of the auction. Thereafter, 
GDA- respondent No.2 could not have compared the selling price 
of the smaller plots with the financial bid made by the appellant 
herein so as to cancel the auction itself. The same was done on an 
irrelevant consideration. Therefore, it was arbitrary, whimsical and 
irrational. Hence, the appellant was justified in seeking the reliefs 
before the High Court. The High Court ought to have considered the 
case of the appellant in the above perspective and granted relief to 
the appellant herein by directing GDA - respondent No.2 to pass an 
order of allotment to the appellant herein. Instead, the High Court has 
been swayed by the argument of GDA - respondent No.2 to the effect 
that the bid offered by the appellant herein was on the lower side. The 
learned senior counsel for the appellant contended that the adjacent 
plot and the plots above 2000 square metres have been allotted by 
the GDA - respondent No.2 at prices only marginally above the reserve 
price whereas in the instant case the appellant had bid a price which 

58
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
was 15.23% above the reserve price. The High Court has also been 
impressed by the argument that the appellant had no vested right as 
no letter of acceptance of bid was issued to it and the earnest money 
of Rs.80,64,000/- was returned to the appellant and therefore, there 
was no right in the appellant to insist upon the allotment of the subject 
plot. This reasoning is also incorrect and flawed. Having regard to the 
facts of the present case and the discussion made above, the High 
Court was not right in dismissing the writ petitions.
28.	 In our view, there cannot be any imprimatur of the Court to such 
arbitrary cancellation of auction by an instrumentality or agency of the 
State in the absence of there being any fraud, collusion, suppression 
etc. Merely because the smaller plots measuring 123 to 132 square 
metres were auctioned and sold at a higher price as compared to 
the subject plot measuring 3150 square metres which is a large 
sized plot, could not have been the basis for cancelling the auction 
insofar as the subject plot is concerned. The demand for smaller plots 
being higher was sold at a higher price per square metre than the 
subject plot, where there was no demand for the subject plot as only 
two bidders participated in the auction. The bid of the appellant was 
above the reserve price. There was no other reason to cancel the 
auction sale of the subject plot. Therefore, GDA - respondent No.2 
was under an obligation in law having accepted the bid offered by the 
appellant to issue the allotment letter instead of cancelling the auction 
on the basis of irrelevant considerations that too behind the back of 
the appellant. Expectation of a higher bid in a subsequent auction 
cannot be a reason to cancel an auction held in accordance with law. 
29.	 The appellant herein as also all bidders would had made all financial 
arrangements before making technical and financial bids in an auction. 
The technical bid of the appellant herein was accepted. There was 
no reason to decline the financial bid made by the appellant which 
was the highest bid. The financial bid was also over and above the 
reserve price. There was no reason attributed to the appellant for 
cancellation of the auction sale. In the circumstances, the appellant 
had a legitimate expectation to receive an allotment letter vis-à-vis 
the subject plot as it was the highest bidder. Instead, without any 
prior notice to the appellant the auction itself was cancelled which 
constrained the appellant to approach the High Court. The High Court 
has lost sight of these facts of the matter and has simply dismissed 
the writ petitions filed by the appellant herein which is not correct.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
59
Golden Food Products India v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others
30.	 We could consider the judgments cited at the Bar as under:
a)	
In Haryana Urban Development Authority vs. Orchid 
Infrastructure Developers (P) Ltd., (2017) 4 SCC 243, the 
contract contained an express clause stating that the presiding 
officer had the right to reject a bid without offering any reasons. 
Although twenty-seven bidders participated in the said auction 
and the reserve price was Rs.106.65 crores and the highest 
bid was Rs.111.75 crores for 9.527 acres of land in Gurgaon, 
the bid was cancelled. However, such a clause is conspicuous 
by its absence in the present case.
b)	
In Rajasthan Housing Board vs. G.S. Investments, (2007) 
1 SCC 477, owing to a news item published in a newspaper 
that large scale bungling had taken place in the auction due 
to which the price fetched for the plots was much below the 
market rate, a direction was issued by this Court to hold a fresh 
auction. Such a situation did not arise in the instant case.
c)	
In State of Orissa vs. Harinarayan Jaiswal, (1972) 2 SCC 
36, there was a direction to hold a re-auction as the power to 
accept or reject the bid was given to the highest authority in 
the State and the State Government was of the opinion that the 
price was inadequate. Possibly, in the facts of the said case, 
the said direction was issued by this Court.
d)	
In Uttar Pradesh Avas Evam Vikas Parishad vs. Om Prakash 
Sharma, (2013) 5 SCC 182, the reserve price was fixed at 
Rs.1,80,200/- and the respondent therein offered Rs.1,31,500/- 
which was much less than the reserve price. Hence, the bid 
was rightly rejected.
e)	
In Meerut Development Authority vs. Association of 
Management Studies, (2009) 6 SCC 171, the request of the 
respondent therein for allotment of remaining 20,000 square 
metres to them as they had acquired 37,000 square metres of 
land as per the reserve price, was rejected as the price quoted 
had been lower than the reserve price for the said remaining 
land and rightly so.
f)	
In Indore Vikas Praadhikaran (IDA) vs. Shri Humud 
Jain Samaj Trust, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3511, this Court 
distinguished Eva Agro Feeds and found that the bid could 
not be accepted as the tender committee while finalizing the 
bids noticed that property tax of Rs.1.25 crore in respect of the 

60
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
subject land therein was outstanding. On noticing this error, the 
Board decided to cancel the bid of the respondent therein and 
decided to issue a fresh notice inviting tenders.
31.	 The following judgments also require consideration:
a)	
In M.P. Power Management Company Limited vs. Sky Power 
Southeast Solar India (Private) Limited, (2023) 2 SCC 703, 
the bid of the respondent therein was accepted and it was 
observed that public interest cannot always be conflated with 
an evaluation of the monetary gain or loss alone.
b)	
In Nagar Nigam, Meerut vs. Al Faheem Meat Exports (P) Ltd., 
(2006) 13 SCC 382, an advertisement inviting applications for 
a fresh contract to run a slaughterhouse was sustained. In the 
said judgment, it was observed that the award of government 
contracts through public auction or public tender was to ensure 
transparency in the public procurement, to maximise the economy 
and efficiency in government procurement, to promote healthy 
competition among the tenderers and to eliminate irregularities, 
interference and corrupt practices by the authorities concerned. 
In rare and exceptional cases, for instance during natural 
calamities and emergencies declared by the Government; where 
the procurement is possible from a single source only; where 
the supplier or contractor has exclusive rights in respect of the 
goods or services and no reasonable alternative or substitute 
exists; where the auction was held on several dates but there 
were no bidders or the bids offered were too low, etc., this 
normal rule may be departed from and such contracts may be 
awarded through “private negotiations”. The Government must 
then have freedom of contract. Some fair play in the joints is a 
necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning 
in an administrative sphere. The plea of the respondent therein 
seeking permission to modernize the slaughterhouse and 
therefore, to refrain from issuing an advertisement was negatived.
c)	
In Subodh Kumar Singh Rathour vs. Kolkata Metropolitan 
Development Authority, (2024) 15 SCC 461, this Court 
observed that merely because the rates embodied in a contract 
with the passage of time have become less appealing, the same 
cannot become a determinative criterion for either terminating 
the contract or for the courts to decline interference in such 
contractual disputes. Public interest cannot be used as a pretext 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
61
Golden Food Products India v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Others
to arbitrarily terminate contracts. Merely because the financial 
terms of a contract are less favourable over a period of time 
does not justify its termination. It was observed that the mere 
possibility of fetching a higher license fee was no ground to 
cancel the tender issued to the appellant therein.
32.	 An auction process has a sanctity attached to it and only for valid 
reasons that the highest bid can be discarded in an auction which 
is otherwise held in accordance with law. If a valid bid has been 
made which is above the reserve price, there should be a rationale 
or reason for not accepting it. Therefore, the decision to discard the 
highest bid must have a nexus to the rationale or the reason. Merely 
because the authority conducting the auction expected a higher bid 
than what the highest bidder had bid cannot be a reason to discard 
the highest bid. In the instant case, no other party had placed a 
bid higher than the appellant herein. There was no infirmity in the 
conduct of the auction. No other party had complained about the 
process of auction conducted by the GDA - respondent No.2. The 
bid offered by the appellant herein was the highest and above the 
reserve price. In the circumstances, the said bid ought to have been 
accepted by GDA - respondent No.2 rather than cancelling the same 
without notice to the appellant herein. Hence, the cancellation of the 
bid submitted by the appellant herein is quashed.
33.	 For the aforesaid reasons, the impugned orders of the High Court 
dated 24.05.2024 and 15.07.2024 passed in the respective writ 
petitions are set-aside. The appellant is directed to re-deposit the 
earnest money preferably within four weeks from today. Within two 
weeks from the date of the re-deposit of the earnest money, the GDA - 
respondent No.2 shall make an order of allotment of the subject plot 
in favour of the appellant herein and take all consequential steps 
for concluding the auction process in favour of the appellant herein. 
These appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms. 
Parties to bear their own costs.
Result of the case: Appeals allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
