[2026] 2 S.C.R. 200 : 2026 INSC 65
X
v.
O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
(Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1233 of 2025)
16 January 2026
[Dipankar Datta* and Satish Chandra Sharma, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Does the first proviso to s.3(2) of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 
require the constitution of a Joint Committee where notices, having 
been given in both Houses on the same day, is later followed by 
refusal to admit the motion by the Presiding Officer of one House 
and admission of the motion by the Presiding Officer of the other 
House; whether, in view of the office of the Chairman of the Rajya 
Sabha falling vacant, the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha 
was competent to refuse admission of the notice of motion; what 
is the effect, if any, of the Deputy Chairman’s refusal to admit 
the motion on the validity of the Speaker’s action under Section 
3(2) of the Inquiry Act; whether the draft decision prepared by the 
Secretary-General of the Rajya Sabha recording that the notice 
of motion given to the Chairman is not “in order” justified in law; 
whether the petitioner is entitled to any relief.
Headnotes†
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 – First proviso to s.3(2) – 
Interpretation – Allegations of misbehaviour were levelled 
against the petitioner, a serving Judge of the Delhi High Court 
after burnt currency notes were allegedly discovered at his 
house during the course of dousing the fire that occurred at 
his residence – In accordance with the “In-House Procedure”, 
a three-member committee was constituted by then CJI to 
examine the allegations, which submitted its report to the 
CJI recording that the allegations were substantiated and that 
they warranted initiation of proceedings for the petitioner’s 
removal from office – CJI then forwarded the report to the 
Hon’ble President and the Hon’ble Prime Minister of India – 
* Author

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
201
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
Writ petition was filed by the Petitioner before Supreme Court, 
challenging Paragraphs 5(b) and 7 of the In-House Procedure, 
the forwarding of the report of the three-member committee 
by the CJI, and the report itself, which was dismissed – In 
the meanwhile, Members of both Houses, gave two notices of 
motion in their respective Houses on the same day seeking 
removal of the petitioner from office – The Chairman of the 
Rajya Sabha resigned from his office of the Vice-President 
of India later that day – Deputy Chairman (discharging the 
functions of the Chairman in his absence) rejected the motion – 
Subsequently, the Speaker of the Lok Sabha proceeded to 
admit the notice given in the Lok Sabha and in accordance with 
s.3(2), constituted a three-member Committee – Challenged 
by the petitioner – Plea of the petitioner that since notices 
u/s.3(1) were given in both Houses on the same day, the 
Committee constituted solely by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha 
violates the proviso – Does the first proviso to s.3(2) require 
the constitution of a Joint Committee where notices, having 
been given in both Houses on the same day, is later followed 
by refusal to admit the motion by the Presiding Officer of one 
House and admission of the motion by the Presiding Officer 
of the other House:
Held: No – The proviso applies to only one specific situation, 
namely, where notices of motion given on the same day have 
been admitted by both Houses – It does not restrict or negate 
the individual authority of either House of Parliament – In a case 
where notices of motion were given in both Houses on the same 
day, the fact that a notice is not admitted in one House will not 
necessitate constitution of a Joint Committee and the Speaker or 
the Chairman, as the case may be, can independently proceed 
to constitute a Committee – The interpretation of the first proviso, 
as advanced by the petitioner, that where notices of motion have 
been given in both Houses on the same day, the rejection of a 
notice in one House would automatically result in the notice in 
the other House failing, not accepted – The first proviso does not 
address all possible permutations but is confined to one specific 
situation, namely, where notices of motion given in both Houses 
on the same day have been admitted in both Houses – It is only in 
that limited situation that the statute mandates the constitution of a 
Joint Committee – The first proviso is not exhaustive but situational 

202
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
in nature – It does not contemplate a scenario where a notice of 
motion is accepted in one House and rejected in the other – To 
interpret the said proviso in the manner suggested by the petitioner 
would require to read into it a disabling consequence, namely, 
that the motion pending in the other House must also necessarily 
fail – Such an interpretation would amount to judicial legislation – 
There is nothing in the Inquiry Act to suggest that rejection of a 
motion in one House would render the other House incompetent 
to proceed in accordance with law. [Paras 12.1-12.3, 12.5, 14, 54]
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 – s.3 – Constitution of India – Article 
91 – Rules of Procedure of the Rajya Sabha – rr.7-9 – Plea of 
the petitioner that the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, 
acting as the Chairman, was not even empowered to consider 
the question of admission of the motion, far less refusing to 
admit it – Whether, in view of the office of the Chairman of 
the Rajya Sabha falling vacant, the Deputy Chairman of the 
Rajya Sabha was competent to refuse admission of the notice 
of motion:
Held: Yes – The Deputy Chairman was competent to consider the 
notice and refuse admission of the motion – Constitution is the 
supreme law of the land and all laws validly enacted owe their 
origin to the Constitution – To proceed in disregard of what the 
Constitution ordains would be an act of gross impropriety on our 
part – To read the statute in isolation of the Constitution would 
be grossly incorrect – Any interpretation of a statute which has 
the effect of generating an interpretation fouling the Constitution 
should be eschewed – A fortiori, a narrow interpretation of the 
word “Chairman” appearing in s.3 overlooking Article 91 would 
be incoherent – The onerous obligation, nay, duty of the Deputy 
Chairman, to perform the duties of the office of the Chairman 
is sacrosanct to the functioning of the Council of States – The 
duties that the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman (in case of a 
vacancy in the former office) perform under the Inquiry Act cannot 
be separated from the office that they hold as the Presiding Officer 
of the House – Furthermore, Doctrine of necessity also compels 
the Deputy Chairman, or whosoever is the incumbent acting in 
place of the Chairman, to exercise the functions of the Chairman 
in his place – Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969 – Doctrine of necessity. 
[Para 17.2, 17.3, 18.3, 22, 54]

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
203
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 – First proviso to s.3(2) – What is 
the effect, if any, of the Deputy Chairman’s refusal to admit 
the motion on the validity of the Speaker’s action u/s.3(2):
Held: No need to examine this issue, as the order of the Deputy 
Chairman is not under challenge – Arguendo, even if it were 
examined, it would have no effect, since the Speaker committed 
no illegality in constituting the committee – Moreover, the validity 
of the Speaker’s action does not hinge upon the correctness or 
otherwise of the decision taken by the Deputy Chairman – The 
first proviso would spring into action only when notices of motion 
(given on the same day in both Houses) have been admitted in 
both Houses – Thus, even if the refusal by the Deputy Chairman 
(performing the duties of the office of the Chairman of the Rajya 
Sabha) were to be ignored as legally unsustainable, the factual as 
well as legal position would still remain as it is: that, as on the date 
when the Speaker acted, there was no admitted motion pending 
in the Rajya Sabha – In the absence of an admitted motion in one 
House, the statutory sine qua non for the applicability of the proviso 
stood unfulfilled – Furthermore, at the highest, a declaration that 
the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha had erred in the exercise 
of his statutory power by failing to act in accordance with law 
which would entail reconsideration of the notice by the Presiding 
Officer of the Rajya Sabha, in accordance with law – However, 
it cannot, retrospectively invalidate a lawful exercise of power 
already undertaken by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, which was 
founded on an admitted motion – Even if the act of the Deputy 
Chairman were to be held illegal and consequently set aside / or 
a reconsideration were ordered, the same would never result in 
restoration of the status quo ante – Even such limited declaratory 
relief, however, cannot be granted in the present case in the 
exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution. 
[Para 24-26, 27.1, 54]
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 – Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969 – 
Whether the draft decision prepared by the Secretary-General 
of the Rajya Sabha recording that the notice of motion given 
to the Chairman is not “in order” justified in law:
Held: No; the manner in which the notice of motion was processed 
at the Secretariat level does not fully align with the role contemplated 

204
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
under law – The Inquiry Act does not contemplate a substantive 
assessment of the merits of the allegations by the Secretariat of 
a House – The Secretary General’s role was expected to remain 
confined to administrative scrutiny, such as verification of procedural 
compliance, and could not extend to assuming a quasi-adjudicatory 
function – Neither the Inquiry Act nor the Rules framed thereunder 
prescribe a mandatory form for a notice of motion – In the absence 
of defined parameters, it is not readily apparent on what basis the 
Secretary General concluded that the Notice of Motion was not ‘in 
order’ – Where no prescribed format exists, a notice containing 
allegations of impropriety against a Judge could not reasonably be 
treated as ineffective solely on account of perceived deficiencies in 
drafting or form – The role of the Secretary General was confined 
to placing the notice before the competent authority, namely, the 
office of the Chairman, without expressing any conclusion as to 
its admissibility – The Secretary General went beyond a purely 
administrative role is apparent from the language employed in 
the document itself – Clarified, that the procedure leading to the 
decision of the Deputy Chairman has been discussed purely 
academically and shall not, directly or indirectly, be relied upon 
or invoked to claim any benefit, leverage, or advantage by the 
petitioner. [Para 49-54]
Constitution of India – Article 32 – Whether the petitioner is 
entitled to any relief:
Held: The extraordinary remedy under Article 32 is confined to 
enforcement of Fundamental Rights and does not extend to issuing 
advisory or corrective directions in relation to internal statutory 
mechanisms of the Parliament, where no present or inevitable 
infraction of any Fundamental Right is evinced – Petitioner is, thus, 
not entitled to any relief – No interference is called for. [Paras 55, 56]
Interpretation of Statutes – Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 – First 
proviso to s.3(2):
Held: A proviso cannot be read in a way which nullifies the provision 
to which it is a proviso, unless such an intention is manifest – The 
main part of s.3(2) vests the power to constitute a Committee in 
the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, upon admission 
of the notice of motion – The first proviso cannot be read to curtail 
this power except in one clearly defined circumstance, namely, 
the admission of notices in both Houses – In all other cases, the 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
205
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
power of the Speaker or the Chairman to constitute a Committee 
remains unaffected. [Para 12.4]
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 – First proviso to s.3(2) – Plea 
of the petitioner that the rejection of a notice in one House 
results in the notice automatically failing in the other House:
Held: Such interpretation would entail consequences of a most 
serious nature – The members would be put to square one and 
the process has to be initiated afresh in either House – Had the 
Parliament intended such far-reaching consequences, it would 
have articulated the first proviso in clear and unambiguous terms – 
Accepting such an argument would produce absurd results where 
the individual capacity of one House in initiating a motion under 
Article 124(4) becomes contingent upon the outcome in the other 
House, even at the stage of admission of such a motion – Taking 
away the autonomy of one of the two Houses of the Parliament 
could not have been the intent behind the first proviso – Such an 
interpretation must also be rejected on the ground that it renders 
the first proviso open to abuse. [Paras 12.5-12.7]
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 – First proviso to s.3(2) – The first 
proviso must be construed to balance prescribed protection 
with the effective functioning of the mechanism for removal of 
a Judge from office triggered by the peoples’ representatives, 
and not to frustrate it altogether – Plea of the petitioner that 
the legislative intent underlying the proviso is to confer an 
additional layer of protection to a Judge, by ensuring that if 
either House is unwilling to admit the motion, the process of 
impeachment must necessarily fail:
Held: Such contention not agreed with – The protection afforded to a 
Judge remains fully intact as, even where a motion is admitted and a 
Committee is constituted, either House retains the absolute authority 
to reject the motion after the Committee’s report is placed before 
it – Moreover, assuming arguendo, that the proviso was intended 
to provide such heightened protection, it cannot be interpreted 
in a manner that renders the mechanism of removal practically 
unworkable – Constitutional safeguards for Judges cannot come at 
the cost of paralysing the removal process itself – The first proviso 
must, therefore, be construed to balance prescribed protection with 
the effective functioning of the mechanism for removal of a Judge 
from office triggered by the peoples’ representatives, and not to 
frustrate it altogether. [Para 12.9]

206
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Prejudice – Plea of the petitioner that initiation of proceedings 
against the petitioner has caused irreparable reputational and 
constitutional prejudice and that the doctrine of “no prejudice” 
cannot apply where mandatory safeguards are violated:
Held: This argument presupposes illegality in the constitution 
of the Committee, which has not been accepted – Once the 
Committee is lawfully constituted, the statute itself provides for 
elaborate safeguards at the investigation stage, including framing 
of charges, opportunity of defence, cross-examination of witnesses, 
and adjudication by a body comprising of senior constitutional 
functionaries – At this nascent stage, no civil consequences follow; 
the motion itself remains pending and can succeed only if both 
Houses ultimately adopt it by the constitutionally mandated special 
majority – Moreover, reputational injury, howsoever unfortunate, 
cannot be a ground to subvert a constitutionally sanctioned statutory 
process, particularly when the Parliament has consciously designed 
a multi tiered safeguard structure before any adverse consequence 
can ensue – Also, the ultimate safeguard of Parliamentary approval 
under Article 124(4) also remains intact – Even from the standpoint 
of the petitioner, no vested or accrued right gets defeated and the 
petitioner has failed to establish infringement of any vested or 
accrued right. [Para 31-34]
Constitution of India – Article 32 – Decision of the Deputy 
Chairman declining to admit the motion was not challenged – 
Effect of:
Held: In the absence of any challenge to the decision of the Deputy 
Chairman, there is no reason to outlaw it – The settled limits of 
writ jurisdiction do not permit the Court to confer relief in vacuum, 
divorced from a direct challenge to the order which is alleged to 
be the source of illegality. [Para 44, 45]
Constitution of India – Article 217 read with Article 124 – 
Removal of a Judge from office – Procedure for – Six stages 
viz., Introduction of Motion & Admission by Speaker/Chairman; 
Formulation of a Committee of three members for making 
investigation; Formulation of Charges and Investigation; 
Report by the Committee and discussion in Parliament; 
Discussion in the Parliament; Order of the President, 
discussed. [Paras 6.1-6.10]

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
207
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
Case Law Cited
Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability v. Union of India [1991] 
Supp. 2 SCR 1 : (1991) 4 SCC 699; Central Bank of India v. 
Workmen [1960] 1 SCR 200 : 1959 SCC OnLine SC 1; Election 
Commission of India v. Subramaniam Swamy [1996] Supp. 1 
SCR 637 : (1996) 4 SCC 104; Vipulbhai M. Chaudhary v. Gujarat 
Coop. Milk Mktg. Federation Ltd. [2015] 3 SCR 997 : (2015) 8 
SCC 1; Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Sunita Mehra (2001) 
9 SCC 344; Chandigarh Administration v. Laxman Roller Flour 
Mills (P) Ltd. (1998) 8 SCC 326; Amina Marwa Sabreen v. State 
of Kerala (2018) 14 SCC 193; Fuleshwar Gope v. Uol [2024] 10 
SCR 315 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2610 - para 27; Vijay Narayan 
Thatte v. State of Maharashtra [2009] 14 SCR 891 : (2009) 9 
SCC 92 - paras 5, 10, 12, 13, 14 & 15; G Narayanaswami v. 
G Pannerselvam [1973] 1 SCR 172 : (1972) 3 SCC 717 - para 
18-20; S.L. Kapoor v. Jagmohan [1981] 1 SCR 746 : (1980) 4 
SCC 379; P.D. Dinakaran (2) v. Judges Inquiry Committee (2011) 
8 SCC 474; Sarojini Ramaswami (Mrs) v. Union of India [1992] 
Supp. 1 SCR 108 : (1992) 4 SCC 506; Krishna Swami v. Union 
of India [1992] Supp. 1 SCR 53 : (1992) 4 SCC 605; Dwarka 
Prasad v. Dwarka Das Saraf [1976] 1 SCR 277 : (1976) 1 SCC 
128;Vishesh Kumar v. Shanti Prasad [1980] 3 SCR 32 : (1980) 2 
SCC 378; S. Sundaram Pillai v. V.R. Pattabiraman [1985] 2 SCR 
643 : (1985) 1 SCC 591; J.K. Industries Ltd. v. Chief Inspector of 
Factories and Boilers [1996] Supp. 6 SCR 798 : (1996) 6 SCC 
665; Director of Education (Secondary) v. Pushpendra Kumar 
[1998] 3 SCR 432 : (1998) 5 SCC 192; Rohitash Kumar v. Om 
Prakash Sharma [2012] 13 SCR 47 : (2013) 11 SCC 451; ECIL v. 
B. Karunakar [1993] Supp. 2 SCR 576 : (1993) 4 SCC 727; State 
Bank of Patiala v. S.K. Sharma [1996] 3 SCR 972 : (1996) 3 SCC 
364; State of U.P. v. Sudhir Kumar Singh [2020] 13 SCR 571 : 
(2021) 19 SCC 706; S.P. Gupta v. U.P. State Electricity Board 
(1991) 2 SCC 263; State of Karnataka v. Sri Darshan [2025] 9 
SCR 194 : 2025 SCC OnLine 1702; L&T Housing Financing 
Limited v. Trishul Developers (2020) 10 SCC 659; Welfare Assn., 
A.R.P. v. Ranjit P. Gohil [2003] 2 SCR 139 : (2003) 9 SCC 358; 
Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. Union of India [2008] 4 SCR 1 : (2008) 
6 SCC 1; Chief Justice of A.P. v. L.V.A. Dixitulu [1979] 1 SCR 
26 : (1979) 2 SCC 34; Jindal Stainless Ltd. v. State of Haryana 
[2016] 10 SCR 1 : (2017) 12 SCC 1; Jayant Verma v. Union of 

208
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
India [2018] 2 SCR 679 : (2018) 4 SCC 743; Rajendra Diwan v. 
Pradeep Kumar Ranibala [2019] 17 SCR 1089 : (2019) 20 SCC 
143 – referred to.
Attorney-General for Ontario v. The Hamilton Street Railway 
Company and Ors. [1903] A.C. 524 – referred to.
List of Acts
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968; Constitution of India; Rules of Procedure 
of the Rajya Sabha; Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969.
List of Keywords
First proviso to s.3(2) of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968; Article 217 
read with Article 124 of the Constitution of India; Allegations of 
misbehaviour against the Judge, Serving Judge of the Delhi High 
Court; Burnt currency notes allegedly discovered; Impeachment; 
In-House Procedure; Notices of motion given on the same day in 
both Houses; Constitution of a Joint Committee; Refusal to admit 
the motion by the Presiding Officer of one House; Admission of 
the motion by the Presiding Officer of the other House; Draft 
decision prepared by the Secretary-General of the Rajya Sabha; 
Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha was competent to refuse 
the motion; Notice of motion given to the Chairman is not “in 
order”; notices of motion; Doctrine of necessity; Reputational 
injury.
Case Arising From
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1233 
of 2025
Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Mukul Rohatgi, Sidharth Luthra, Jayant Mehta, Siddharth Aggarwal, 
Sr. Advs., Ms. Stuti Gujraj, Vaibhav Niti, Ms. Devanshi Singh, 
Keshav Sehgal, Ms. Sowjhanya Shankaran, Vishwajeet Singh, 
Abhinav Sekhri, Kartikeye Dang, Adarsh Joshi.
Adv. for the Respondent(s):
Tushar Mehta, Solicitor General, Aman Mehta, Ms. Astha Singh.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
209
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Dipankar Datta, J.
INDEX
PREFACE .................................................................................
2
FACTS ......................................................................................
2
PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF A JUDGE .........................
6
THE CONUNDRUM .................................................................
11
SUBMISSIONS .........................................................................
13
ISSUES .....................................................................................
13
ANALYSIS .................................................................................
14
Issue I : How must the first proviso be construed? .........
14
Issue II : Whether the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya 
Sabha was competent to refuse the motion? ..................
19
Issue III: What is the effect, if any, of the Deputy Chairman’s 
refusal to admit the motion on the validity of the Speaker’s 
action under Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act? ..................
29
What, if the order of the Deputy Chairman, was to 
be held illegal? .........................................................
29
The Prejudice Angle – need not be tested ..............
32
Effect of not challenging the decision of the Deputy 
Chairman ..................................................................
35
Issue IV: Draft decision prepared by the Secretary-General 
of the Rajya Sabha – whether justified in law? ...............
39
SO FAR ....................................................................................
44
Issue V : Whether the petitioner is entitled to any relief? ....
45
CONCLUSION ..........................................................................
45
APPENDIX- I .............................................................................
46
APPENDIX- II ...........................................................................
52
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.

210
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
PREFACE
1.	
This writ petition tasks us to decide an important question relating 
to proper interpretation of Section 3 of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 
19681, which hitherto has never emerged. Petitioner, a High Court 
Judge, contends that the procedure prescribed for the constitution 
of a Committee under Section 3 of the Inquiry Act has not been 
followed, thereby infringing his Fundamental Rights.
FACTS
2.	
Facts in brief, relevant for deciding this writ petition, are these. 
The incident
2.1	 While serving as a Judge of the Delhi High Court, a fire occurred 
at the petitioner’s residence on 14th March, 2025. During the 
course of dousing the fire, burnt currency notes were allegedly 
discovered at his house. Following this incident, allegations of 
misbehaviour were levelled against the petitioner. In accordance 
with the “In-House Procedure” adopted by the Supreme Court 
in its Full Court meeting of 15th December, 1999, the Chief 
Justice of India2 constituted a three-member committee on 22nd 
March, 2025 to examine the allegations. The three-member 
committee submitted its report to the CJI on 3rd May, 2025, 
recording that the allegations were substantiated and that they 
warranted initiation of proceedings for the petitioner’s removal 
from office. In terms of the procedure, the CJI then forwarded 
the report to the Hon’ble President3 and the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister of India.
Precursor Litigation
2.2	 Aggrieved, the petitioner filed a writ petition4 before this Court, 
challenging Paragraphs 5(b) and 7 of the In-House Procedure, 
the forwarding of the report of the three-member committee by 
1	
Inquiry Act
2	
CJI
3	
President
4	
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 699 of 2025

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
211
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
the CJI, and the report itself. Four days after the said petition 
was filed, i.e., on 21st July, 2025, the Monsoon Session of 
the Parliament commenced. During this session, Members of 
both Houses, desirous of initiating proceedings for removal of 
the petitioner from office, gave two notices of motion in their 
respective Houses on the same day (21st July, 2025). In the 
following part of this judgment, we will discuss, inter alia, the 
process of removal of a Judge from office, the notices that are 
required to be given, and the consequences of such notices 
being given on the same day. 
2.3	 It is, however, apposite to note that the petitioner’s writ petition 
was dismissed on 7th August, 2025, by a two-Judge Bench 
of this Court of which one of us (Dipankar Datta];’) was a 
member.
Notices of motion seeking removal of the petitioner from office: 
incidents of 21st July, 2025
2.4	 Invoking the provisions of the Inquiry Act, a notice was given on 
21st July, 2025, of a motion signed by more than 100 members 
in the Lok Sabha for presenting an address to the President 
praying for the petitioner’s removal. The said notice was received 
by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha at 12:30 p.m., but was not 
admitted on the same day. 
2.5	 After a brief interval, between 4:07 p.m. and 4:19 p.m., a notice 
for the same purpose, signed by more than 50 members, was 
given in the Rajya Sabha. The Chairman of the Rajya Sabha 
addressed the House regarding the said notice. In his speech, 
among other matters, the Chairman noted that a similar notice 
may have been given in the Lok Sabha. Referring to the proviso 
to Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act (which requires the constitution 
of a Committee by the Presiding Officers of both Houses of the 
Parliament when notices of motion for the removal of a Judge 
are given in both Houses on the same day), the Chairman 
directed that “the Secretary-General will take necessary steps 
in this direction”. 
2.6	 Notably, the Chairman resigned from his office of the Vice-
President of India later that day (21st July, 2025).

212
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
2.7	 Pursuant to the direction of the then Chairman, the Secretariat 
of the Rajya Sabha requested information from its counterpart 
in the Lok Sabha as to whether such a notice had indeed 
been given, to which the response was in the affirmative. 
Following this, the notice given in the Rajya Sabha was sent 
to the Members’ Salaries & Allowances Branch of the Rajya 
Sabha Secretariat for verification of the signatures of the notice 
givers. Out of the 62 notice givers, the signatures of three did 
not match their specimen signatures. 
Consideration of the Notice by the Secretary General and non-
admission by Deputy Chairman
2.8	 On 11th August, 2025, the notice given in the Rajya Sabha was 
scrutinized by its Secretary-General, who observed various 
deficiencies therein and held it to be not “in order.” The draft 
decision of the Secretary-General was then placed before the 
Deputy Chairman, discharging the functions of the Chairman in 
his absence, who concurred with the conclusion and accordingly 
recorded that the notice was “not admitted”. This decision was 
communicated to the Secretary-General of the Lok Sabha on 
the same day.
Admission of notice by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and 
constitution of Committee
2.9	 On 12th August, 2025, having received the communication that 
the notice had not been admitted by the Deputy Chairman 
(performing the duties of the office of Chairman), the Speaker 
of the Lok Sabha proceeded to admit the notice given in the 
Lok Sabha on 21st July, 2025. The Speaker announced this 
admission in the House and, in accordance with Section 3(2) 
of the Inquiry Act, constituted a three-member Committee5.
2.10	The Committee subsequently served upon the petitioner the 
memo of charges. There is some dispute as to whether all the 
materials that are sought to be relied upon have been furnished 
or not. That, however, is not a matter for our consideration. 
5	
Committee

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
213
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL OF A JUDGE
3.	
For a clearer understanding of the arguments advanced referring to 
the Constitutional and the statutory provisions relatable to removal 
of a Judge from office, we consider it apposite to first outline the 
process for such removal. 
4.	
Article 124 of the Constitution of India provides for “Establishment 
and constitution of Supreme Court”. Clause (4)6 thereof provides 
that a Judge of the Supreme Court can be removed from office by 
the order of the President. It further lays down two conditions for 
removal: first, that the Judge must be guilty of “proved misbehaviour 
or incapacity”; and second, that the resolution for removal must 
be passed in each House of Parliament “by a majority of the total 
membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-
thirds of the members of that House present and voting”. From this, 
it is clear that a “resolution” is to be moved in each House of the 
Parliament and that misbehaviour or incapacity must be “proved”. 
Article 124, however, does not specify the procedure for presenting 
such an address, who may move it, how it is to be moved, or for 
investigating allegations against a Judge. Clause (5)7, however, 
empowers the Parliament to regulate these procedural aspects by 
law. In exercise of this power, the Parliament, in the nineteenth year 
of the Republic, enacted the Inquiry Act.
5.	
The procedure applicable for removal of a Judge of the Supreme 
Court is also applicable for removal of a High Court Judge, as adopted 
under sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of Article 217 of the Constitution.
6.	
On a reading of the relevant provisions, we find that the process 
of removal of a Judge is indeed a tedious one involving various 
stages. The process for removal of a Judge, as envisaged in the 
Constitution and the Inquiry Act, is discussed below for completeness 
of understanding.
6	
(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office except by an order of the President 
passed after an address by each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership 
of that House and by a majority of not less than two – thirds of the members of that House present and 
voting has been presented to the President in the same session for such removal on the ground of 
proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
7	
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an address and for the 
investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge under clause (4).

214
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Stage I: Introduction of Motion & Admission by Speaker/Chairman
6.1	 Section 3(1) of the Inquiry Act provides that to initiate the process 
for removal of a Judge, a notice must be given of a motion for 
presenting an address to the President praying for removal of 
such Judge. The said notice may be given in any house of the 
Parliament. In the Lok Sabha, the said notice must be signed 
by at least 100 of its members. A minimum of 50 signatories is 
required in the case of the Rajya Sabha. Once such a notice 
has been given, it is for the Speaker (if the motion is given in 
the Lok Sabha) or the Chairman (if the motion is given in the 
Rajya Sabha) to take a call on admission of the motion. 
6.2	 The Speaker or the Chairman may either admit or reject the 
motion after “consulting such persons, if any, as he thinks fit 
and after considering such materials, if any, as may be available 
to him” [see: Section 3(1) of the Inquiry Act]. If the motion is 
not admitted, it brings down the curtain; if accepted, then the 
Committee [referred to in Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act] is to 
be formed for taking the process ahead. User of the modal 
verb “may” in Section 3(1) suggests that the Speaker or the 
Chairman, as the case may be, is vested with a discretion 
whether or not to admit the motion. 
Stage II: Formulation of a Committee of three members for making 
investigation 
6.3	 Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act provides that once a notice is 
admitted, the motion is to be kept pending, and the Speaker 
or the Chairman is required to constitute a Committee for the 
purpose of investigating the grounds on which the removal of a 
Judge is sought. The Committee shall consist of three members: 
one chosen from among the Chief Justice and other Judges 
of the Supreme Court, who would preside over the meetings 
of the committee8; one chosen from among the Chief Justices 
of the High Courts; and one person who, in the opinion of the 
Speaker or, as the case may be, the Chairman, is a distinguished 
jurist.
8	
Rule 3 of the Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
215
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
6.4	 The second proviso to Section 3(2) provides that if notices 
have been given in both Houses of the Parliament, albeit on 
different dates, the notice submitted later in point of time shall 
stand rejected. Consequently, in such a case, the Committee 
shall be constituted by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha or the 
Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, wherever notice is given prior 
in point of time. 
6.5	 The first proviso to Section 3(2) contemplates a situation in 
which notices are given in both Houses on the same day. In 
such a case, “no Committee shall be constituted unless the 
motion has been admitted in both Houses; and where such 
motion has been admitted in both Houses, the Committee 
shall be constituted jointly by the Speaker and the Chairman”. 
Thus, this situation calls for the formation of a Joint Committee. 
It is this provision that forms the fulcrum of the dispute in the 
present case, and we propose to address the same a little 
later.
Stage III: Formulation of Charges and Investigation
6.6	 The Committee is required to frame definite charges against the 
Judge proceeded against; provide such Judge with a statement 
of the grounds on which such charges are based; afford him a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard; and, where the allegation 
relates to physical or mental incapacity, the Committee would 
have the power to constitute a Medical Board [see: Sections 
3(3), (4), (5), (6), (7) & (8) of the Inquiry Act].
6.7	 The Committee, being empowered to regulate its own procedure, 
is mandated to afford the Judge a reasonable opportunity to 
cross-examine witnesses, adduce evidence, and be heard in 
his defence [see: Section 4(1) of the Inquiry Act].
Stage IV: Report by the Committee and discussion in Parliament
6.8	 After conclusion of the investigation, the Committee must submit 
a report to the Speaker or the Chairman or both stating its 
findings on each charge. If the committee finds the Judge not 
guilty, it is the end of the matter; however, if the finding is of 
guilt, the motion for removal is taken up for discussion in the 
Parliament. [see: Sections 4 (2) & (3) and 6 of the Inquiry Act].

216
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Stage V: Discussion in the Parliament
6.9	 Upon receiving a report that finds the Judge guilty of any 
misbehaviour or suffering from any incapacity, the motion—which 
has been kept pending—shall be taken up for consideration by 
the House(s) of Parliament in which it was pending, together 
with the report of the Committee. Both Houses, after discussion, 
shall either adopt or reject the motion in accordance with the 
numerical requirements prescribed under Article 124(4) of the 
Constitution, namely, “by a majority of the total membership of 
that House and by a majority of not less than two – thirds of the 
members of that House present and voting”. When the motion 
is adopted by both Houses, the “misbehaviour or incapacity of 
the Judge shall be deemed to have been proved”. 
Stage VI : Order of the President
6.10	 As is required by Article 124(4), a Judge can be removed 
only “by an order of the President”. Thus, after a motion has 
been passed by both houses, it is the President’s order which 
results in removal of a Judge from office. 
THE CONUNDRUM
7.	
Proviso 1 to Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act reads:
“Provided that where notices of a motion referred to in 
sub-section (1) are given on the same day in both Houses 
of Parliament, no Committee shall be constituted unless 
the motion has been admitted in both Houses and where 
such motion has been admitted in both Houses, the 
Committee shall be constituted jointly by the Speaker and 
the Chairman.”
8.	
Petitioner is aggrieved by the constitution of the Committee solely 
by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. Since notices under Section 3(1) 
of the 1968 Act were given in both Houses on the same day, the 
petitioner has contended that the Committee constituted by the 
Speaker of the Lok Sabha violates the proviso. According to the 
petitioner, since notices were given in both Houses on the same 
day, a Joint Committee should have been formed by the Speaker 
of the Lok Sabha and the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, subject 
to the motion having been admitted in both the Houses; and if the 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
217
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
motion fails in any House, the consequence, in his submission, is 
that the notice given in the other House must also fail. In essence, 
the petitioner’s argument is that where notices are given in both 
Houses on the same day, and the motion is not admitted in one 
House, the Presiding Officer of the other House, i.e., the Speaker 
or the Chairman, as the case may be, ceases to have the authority 
to proceed with the motion.
9.	
On the other hand, the respondents have invited us to interpret the 
provision in a manner that facilitates the proceedings for investigation 
rather than bringing them to a grinding halt. According to their reading 
of the first proviso, the decisive factor is not the mere giving of notices 
of motion in both Houses on the same day, but their admission on the 
same day. It was contended that even if notices are given in both the 
Houses, where the motion is admitted in only one House, that House 
remains competent to proceed with the constitution of a Committee 
through its Presiding Officer, i.e., the Speaker or the Chairman, as 
the case may be, notwithstanding that the motion might have been 
rejected by the Presiding Officer of the other House. Drawing our 
attention to the documents, since placed on record, the respondents 
submitted that the motion was never admitted by the Chairman of 
the Rajya Sabha. Consequently, it has been their argument, that the 
Committee was validly constituted by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha. 
SUBMISSIONS
10.	 The written submissions filed by the parties have been made part 
of this judgment as appendices. We find reference to numerous 
precedents by the parties, which were not cited in course of hearing. 
For brevity’s sake, the key arguments have been referred to by us 
in the judgment wherever necessary. 
ISSUES
11.	 Based on the arguments advanced during proceedings in Court and 
the written submissions filed by the parties, the following questions 
arise for our consideration:
I.	
How should the first proviso to Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act be 
construed? Does it require the constitution of a Joint Committee 
where notices, having been given in both Houses on the same 
day, is later followed by refusal to admit the motion by the 

218
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Presiding Officer of one House and admission of the motion 
by the Presiding Officer of the other House?
II.	
Whether, in view of the office of the Chairman of the Rajya 
Sabha falling vacant, the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya 
Sabha was competent to refuse admission of the notice of 
motion? 
III.	
What is the effect, if any, of the Deputy Chairman’s refusal to 
admit the motion on the validity of the Speaker’s action under 
Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act?
IV.	
Whether the draft decision prepared by the Secretary-General 
of the Rajya Sabha recording that the notice of motion given 
to the Chairman is not “in order” justified in law?
V.	
Whether the petitioner is entitled to any relief?
ANALYSIS
Issue I : How must the first proviso be construed?
12.	 Under the heading “Conundrum,” we have examined the differing 
views presented before us on the proper construction of the first 
proviso. Section 3 of the Inquiry Act, inter alia, prescribes the 
procedure to be followed by the Parliament in considering a motion 
and in conducting an investigation into the allegations made against 
a Judge. The first proviso to Section 3(2) addresses the specific 
situation where notices of motion are given in both Houses but on 
the same day. There is no dispute that the object of the said proviso 
is to provide an additional safeguard to the Judge by requiring the 
constitution of a Joint Committee of the Speaker and the Chairman and 
to prevent a situation where the Judge is made to attend proceedings 
before two separate committees constituted by the Speaker and the 
Chairman. The question before us, however, is: when precisely is 
this safeguard triggered? 
12.1.	 We are unable to accept the interpretation of the first proviso, 
as advanced by Mr. Rohatgi, learned senior counsel for the 
petitioner, namely, that where notices of motion have been 
given in both Houses on the same day, the rejection of a 
notice in one House would automatically result in the notice 
in the other House failing for the following reasons. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
219
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
12.2.	 The first proviso does not address all possible permutations 
but is confined to one specific situation, namely, where notices 
of motion given in both Houses on the same day have been 
admitted in both Houses. It is only in that limited situation that 
the statute mandates the constitution of a Joint Committee. 
The said proviso does not prescribe a condition precedent 
for the formation of a Committee in cases other than the one 
expressly provided.
12.3.	 In other words, the first proviso is not exhaustive but situational 
in nature. It does not contemplate a scenario where a notice 
of motion is accepted in one House and rejected in the 
other. To interpret the said proviso in the manner suggested 
by Mr. Rohatgi would require us to read into it a disabling 
consequence, namely, that the motion pending in the other 
House must also necessarily fail. Such an interpretation 
would amount to judicial legislation, a course we are neither 
empowered nor inclined to undertake.
12.4.	 It is a settled principle of statutory interpretation that a proviso 
cannot be read in a way which nullifies the provision to which 
it is a proviso9, unless such an intention is manifest. The main 
part of Section 3(2) vests the power to constitute a Committee 
in the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, upon 
admission of the notice of motion. The first proviso cannot 
be read to curtail this power except in one clearly defined 
circumstance, namely, the admission of notices in both Houses. 
In all other cases, the power of the Speaker or the Chairman 
to constitute a Committee remains unaffected.
12.5.	 There is nothing in the Inquiry Act to suggest that rejection of a 
motion in one House would render the other House incompetent 
to proceed in accordance with law. The argument, therefore, 
lacks any legal foundation. The interpretation advanced by 
the petitioner of rejection of a notice in one House resulting 
in the notice automatically failing in the other House would 
entail consequences of a most serious nature. The members 
9	
see: A.N. Sehgal v. Raje Ram Sheoran (1992) Supp. 1 SCC 304; Tribhovandas Haribhai Tamboli v. 
Gujarat Revenue Tribunal (1991) 3 SCC 442; Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank 
Ltd. v. Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Banks Employees Union & Anr. (2004) 1 SCC 
574; and Kerala State Housing Board v. Ramapriya Hotels (P) Ltd. (1994) 5 SCC 672.

220
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
would be put to square one and the process has to be initiated 
afresh in either House. Had the Parliament intended such 
far-reaching consequences, it would have articulated the first 
proviso in clear and unambiguous terms. The absence of any 
express provision to that effect is, in our opinion, determinative. 
12.6.	 Looked from another angle, accepting such an argument would 
produce absurd results where the individual capacity of one 
House in initiating a motion under Article 124(4) becomes 
contingent upon the outcome in the other House, even at 
the stage of admission of such a motion. Taking away the 
autonomy of one of the two Houses of the Parliament could 
not have been the intent behind the first proviso. 
12.7.	 Such an interpretation must also be rejected on the ground 
that it renders the first proviso open to abuse. It would permit 
a situation where, upon getting the wind of a notice of motion 
being given for removal of a Judge with a real likelihood of 
the same being admitted by the Presiding Officer of one 
House, certain members of the other House not inclined to 
have the process of removal initiated against the Judge may 
deliberately give a defective notice on the same day, solely 
with the intention of scuttling the proceedings. Upon such 
notice subsequently being found to be defective and not 
admitted, the mere fact that such a notice was introduced 
on the same day would lead to the first proviso being set 
in action mandating constitution of a Joint Committee, as 
argued by the petitioner, thereby leading to frustration of 
the proceedings in the first House. Furthermore, it is also 
possible that upon introduction of the notice of motion in the 
second House, the Speaker or the Chairman does not admit 
or reject the motion. Such an act, on a literal application of the 
first proviso, would be sufficient to trigger the requirement of 
Joint Committee. The proviso cannot be allowed to be used 
as a weapon for scuttling proceedings or giving a veto to the 
Houses of Parliament. 
12.8.	 In our opinion, the mischief which the Inquiry Act sought 
to remedy was the absence of a statutory mechanism for 
investigating into allegations against a Judge and for facilitating 
such investigation. The Inquiry Act cannot be interpreted in a 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
221
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
manner that frustrates this objective by permitting the proviso 
to be employed as an instrument of obstruction.
12.9.	 It has been contended, with considerable emphasis, that 
the legislative intent underlying the proviso is to confer an 
additional layer of protection to a Judge, by ensuring that if 
either House is unwilling to admit the motion, the process of 
impeachment must necessarily fail. We are unable to agree with 
such contention. In our view, the protection afforded to a Judge 
remains fully intact as, even where a motion is admitted and 
a Committee is constituted, either House retains the absolute 
authority to reject the motion after the Committee’s report 
is placed before it. Moreover, assuming arguendo, that the 
proviso was intended to provide such heightened protection, it 
cannot be interpreted in a manner that renders the mechanism 
of removal practically unworkable. Constitutional safeguards 
for Judges cannot come at the cost of paralysing the removal 
process itself. The first proviso must, therefore, be construed to 
balance prescribed protection with the effective functioning of 
the mechanism for removal of a Judge from office triggered by 
the peoples’ representatives, and not to frustrate it altogether.
13.	 Also, as contended by Mr. Mehta, learned Solicitor General 
representing the respondents, the first proviso is intended to obviate 
the risk of parallel committees being constituted by the Presiding 
Officers of the both Houses of Parliament in a circumstance where 
the Presiding Officers of both Houses, unaware of a notice given in 
the other, proceeds to admit the motions and constitutes two separate 
committees. Highly improbable though it seems to be (unawareness 
of the Presiding Officers), we cannot rule out the possibility. Such a 
situation would inevitably result in the formation of two committees, 
giving rise to a serious possibility of conflicting and inconsistent 
conclusions apart from requiring the Judge to face two investigations.
14.	 Finding ourselves in disagreement with the interpretation proposed 
by the petitioner, we hold that the first proviso caters to only one 
situation, that is, when notices of motion were given in both Houses 
on the same day and were admitted by both Houses (irrespective 
of their admission on the same or different dates). Therefore, in a 
case where notices of motion were given in both Houses on the 
same day, the fact that a notice is not admitted in one House will 

222
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
not necessitate constitution of a Joint Committee and the Speaker 
or the Chairman, as the case may be, can independently proceed 
to constitute a Committee. 
Issue II : Whether the Deputy Chairman of the 
Rajya Sabha was competent to refuse the motion?
15.	 The above issue stems from the contention of the petitioner that the 
Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha, acting as the Chairman, was 
not even empowered to consider the question of admission of the 
motion, far less refusing to admit it, which has strongly been resisted 
by the respondents by contending that the office of the Chairman 
having fallen vacant, in terms of the Constitutional scheme, it is 
the Deputy Chairman who has to perform the duties of the office 
of Chairman. 
15.1.	 Petitioner contended that clause (a) of Section 2 of Inquiry Act 
defines Chairman as the Chairman of the Council of States. 
The fact that the legislature has used the word “means” and 
not the phrase ‘means and includes’ suggests that the definition 
is exhaustive. Thus, the Deputy Chairman could not have 
usurped the statutory power vested in the Chairman of the 
Rajya Sabha and act in his place, and consequently could not 
have taken any decision whatsoever concerning the motion. 
15.2.	 Reference was made by Mr. Rohatgi to the rules framed under 
the Inquiry Act being the Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 196910. After 
drawing our attention to Rules 16 and 17, it was argued that 
the rules expressly but narrowly enumerate certain functions 
that may be discharged by the Deputy Speaker or the Deputy 
Chairman in the absence of the Speaker or the Chairman, as 
the case may be. Emphasis was laid on the fact that these rules 
confer authority only in limited and specified circumstances, 
and do not extend to the exercise of powers contemplated 
under Section 3 of the Inquiry Act. The legislative intent is clear 
that the authority conferred on the Speaker or the Chairman 
under the Inquiry Act does not extend to the Deputy Speaker 
or the Deputy Chairman, unless expressly provided.
10	
Inquiry Rules

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
223
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
15.3.	 Drawing support from this Court’s decision in Sub-Committee 
on Judicial Accountability v. Union of India11, it was 
contended that the rules of procedure of the Rajya Sabha 
cannot govern the proceedings under the Inquiry Act. The 
Inquiry Act operates as a code in itself. Paragraphs 91, 92, 
95 and 96 of Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability 
(supra) were relied on by him.
15.4.	 Should in terms of Article 91 the Deputy Chairman were held 
empowered to act as the Chairman and decide on the question 
of admission of a motion moved by certain members of the 
Rajya Sabha, Mr. Rohatgi next expressed an apprehension 
that a situation could arise where the Deputy Chairman himself 
is a signatory to the notice of motion in his capacity as a 
member of the House. In such a circumstance, if the Deputy 
Chairman were to take any decision on the motion as the 
Presiding Officer, it was feared that he would effectively be 
acting as a judge in his own cause.
16.	 Per contra, Mr. Mehta invited our attention to Part V of the Constitution, 
and in particular, Articles 89 and 91. Clause (1) of Article 89 provides 
that the Vice-President of India shall be the ex officio Chairman of 
the Council of States. Clause (2) thereof provides that the Council of 
States shall, as soon as may be, choose a member of the Council 
to be the Deputy Chairman. 
16.1.	 Further, he referred to Article 91 of the Constitution. We 
can do no better than reproduce it in its entirety for a better 
understanding:
91. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person 
to perform the duties of the office of, or to act as, 
Chairman:
(1) While the office of Chairman is vacant, or during 
any period when the Vice-President is acting as, or 
discharging the functions of, President, the duties of 
the office shall be performed by the Deputy Chairman, 
or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, 
by such member of the Council of States as the 
President may appoint for the purpose. 
11	
(1991) 4 SCC 699

224
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any 
sitting of the Council of States the Deputy Chairman, 
or, if he is also absent, such person as may be 
determined by the rules of procedure of the Council, 
or, if no such person is present, such other person 
as may be determined by the Council, shall act as 
Chairman.
16.2.	 We were also shown Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
Rajya Sabha, framed under Article 118 of the Constitution, 
which provides that the Deputy Chairman is elected by the 
members of the House. Rule 9 of the Rules of Procedure 
further delineates the powers of the Deputy Chairman, which 
reads as under:
9. The Deputy Chairman or other member competent 
to preside over a sitting of the Council under the 
Constitution or these rules shall, when so presiding, 
have the same power as the Chairman when presiding 
over the Council and all references to the Chairman in 
these rules shall in these circumstances be deemed 
to be, references to any such person so presiding. 
(emphasis by counsel)
17.	 After having considered the constitutional and statutory provisions 
and the arguments advanced, we find ourselves in disagreement with 
the contention that the Deputy Chairman could not have rejected 
the motion.
17.1.	 Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 91, envisage two distinct 
scenarios: vacancy and absence, respectively. Clause (1) 
applies where the office of the Chairman is vacant or the 
Chairman is acting as the President, in which case the Deputy 
Chairman performs the duties of the office of the Chairman. 
Clause (2), by contrast, applies where the office is not vacant 
but the Chairman is merely absent from a sitting, and the 
Deputy Chairman only acts as the Chairman for that sitting.
17.2.	 To read the statute in isolation of the Constitution would be 
grossly incorrect. True it is, this Court in Sub-committee 
on Judicial Accountability (supra) held that the rules 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
225
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
framed under Article 11812 of the Constitution would not 
govern the procedure under the Inquiry Act; however, the 
observations were made in the specific context of the issue 
which was considered. It is important to notice that neither 
Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act nor its proviso was under 
consideration. 
17.3.	 We see no reason why Article 91 of the Constitution should 
be kept aside when a court is tasked to make a meaningful 
interpretation of any provision of the Inquiry Act or, for that 
matter, any other enactment. After all, the Constitution is the 
supreme law of the land and all laws validly enacted owe their 
origin to the Constitution. To proceed in disregard of what the 
Constitution ordains would be an act of gross impropriety on 
our part. 
17.4.	 Any interpretation of a statute which has the effect of generating 
an interpretation fouling the Constitution should be eschewed. 
A fortiori, a narrow interpretation of the word “Chairman” 
appearing in Section 3 overlooking Article 91 would be 
incoherent. The onerous obligation, nay, duty of the Deputy 
Chairman, to perform the duties of the office of the Chairman 
is sacrosanct to the functioning of the Council of States. The 
duties that the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman (in case 
of a vacancy in the former office) perform under the Inquiry 
Act cannot be separated from the office that they hold as the 
Presiding Officer of the House.
18.	 As regards Mr. Rohatgi’s apprehension that the Deputy Chairman 
may himself be a signatory to the notice, apart from the fact that the 
situation posited is purely hypothetical and need not detain us, we 
are unable to agree with Mr. Rohatgi on this proposition. 
18.1.	 We find it profitable to refer to the following observations made 
by the Privy Council in Attorney-General for Ontario v. The 
Hamilton Street Railway Company And Ors.13 as relied 
12	
Rules of Procedure 
Each House of Parliament may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, 
its procedure and the conduct of its business.
…
13	
[1903] A.C. 524

226
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
upon by the Constitution Bench in Central Bank of India v. 
Workmen14:
…They would be worthless as being speculative 
opinions on hypothetical questions. It would be 
contrary to principle, inconvenient, and inexpedient 
that opinions should be given upon such questions 
at all. When they arise, they must arise in concrete 
cases, involving private rights; and it would be 
extremely unwise for any judicial tribunal to attempt 
beforehand to exhaust all possible cases and facts 
which might occur to qualify, cut down, and override 
the operation of particular words when the concrete 
case is not before it.
18.2.	 Be that as it may, assuming that the Deputy Chairman happens 
to be a signatory to the motion, he must, in his administrative 
prudence recuse to act as the Deputy Chairman in that case. 
After all, the Rules of Procedure of the Rajya Sabha, under Rule 
8, do provide for a panel of Vice-Chairmen to be nominated by 
the Chairman, who would act in the absence of the Chairman 
as well as the Deputy Chairman. 
18.3.	 That apart, if at all such a situation arises, the doctrine 
of necessity could also compel the Deputy Chairman, or 
whosoever is the incumbent acting in place of the Chairman, 
to exercise the functions of the Chairman in his place. 
18.4.	 Doctrine of necessity, as elaborated by a 3-Judge Bench of 
this Court in Election Commission of India v. Subramaniam 
Swamy15 would make it clear that despite the apprehension of 
a possible bias, the decision-making authority must proceed to 
adjudicate the issue in the interest of necessity. The relevant 
portion of the decision reads thus:
16. We must have a clear conception of the doctrine. 
It is well settled that the law permits certain things 
to be done as a matter of necessity which it would 
14	
1959 SCC OnLine SC 1
15	
(1996) 4 SCC 104

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
227
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
otherwise not countenance on the touchstone of 
judicial propriety. Stated differently, the doctrine of 
necessity makes it imperative for the authority to 
decide and considerations of judicial propriety must 
yield. It is often invoked in cases of bias where there 
is no other authority or Judge to decide the issue. 
If the doctrine of necessity is not allowed full play in 
certain unavoidable situations, it would impede the 
course of justice itself and the defaulting party would 
benefit therefrom. Take the case of a certain taxing 
statute which taxes certain perquisites allowed to 
Judges. If the validity of such a provision is challenged 
who but the members of the judiciary must decide 
it. If all the Judges are disqualified on the plea that 
striking down of such a legislation would benefit 
them, a stalemate situation may develop. In such 
cases the doctrine of necessity comes into play. 
If the choice is between allowing a biased person 
to act or to stifle the action altogether, the choice 
must fall in favour of the former as it is the only way 
to promote decision-making. In the present case 
also if the two Election Commissioners are able 
to reach a unanimous decision, there is no need 
for the Chief Election Commissioner to participate, 
if not the doctrine of necessity may have to be 
invoked.
(emphasis ours)
19.	 The argument touching upon the provisions of Rule 16 and 17 of 
the Inquiry Rules, howsoever appealing, is without merit and must 
be rejected. The Inquiry Rules envisage a possible absence of the 
Chairman whereas the Constitution provides for the Deputy Chairman 
in the event of the office of Chairman being vacant. Similar is the 
case for the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha. Hence, when the 
statute is silent on a particular aspect, the Constitution and the 
doctrine of silence, must be read into the statute to fill its gaps. The 
Constitution is the supreme and overarching legal framework, to 
which all statutes must conform. For an elaborate understanding, it 
would be profitable to refer to a decision of this Court in Vipulbhai 

228
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
M. Chaudhary v. Gujarat Coop. Milk Mktg. Federation Ltd16, which 
expounded the law in the following terms:
24. No doubt, in the cases referred to above, the respective 
Acts contained a provision regarding no confidence. What 
about a situation where there is no express provision 
regarding no confidence? Once the cooperative society 
is conferred a constitutional status, it should rise to the 
constitutional aspirations as a democratic institution. So, 
it is for the respective legislative bodies to ensure that 
there is democratic functioning. When the Constitution 
is eloquent, the laws made thereunder cannot be silent. 
If the statute is silent or imprecise on the requirements 
under the Constitution, it is for the court to read the 
constitutional mandate into the provisions concerned and 
declare it accordingly. Article 243-ZT has given a period 
of one year to frame/reframe the statutes in consonance 
with Part IX-B and thereafter i.e. with effect from 12-1-
2013, those provisions which are inconsistent with Part 
IX-B, cease to operate.
25. Silence in the Constitution and abeyance as well has 
been dealt extensively by Michael Foley in his celebrated 
work The Silence of Constitutions. To quote from the 
Preface:
“Abeyances refer to those constitutional gaps 
which remain vacuous for positive and constructive 
purposes. They are not, in any sense, truces between 
two or more defined positions, but rather a set of 
implicit agreements to collude in keeping fundamental 
questions of political authority in a state of irresolution. 
Abeyances are, in effect, compulsive hedges against 
the possibility of that which is unresolved being 
exploited and given meanings almost guaranteed 
to generate profound division and disillusionment. 
Abeyances are important, therefore, because of their 
capacity to deter the formation of conflicting positions 
in just those areas where the potential for conflict is 
16	
(2015) 8 SCC 1

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
229
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
most acute. So central are these abeyances, together 
with the social temperament required to sustain them, 
that when they become the subject of heightened 
interest and subsequent conflict, they are not merely 
accompanied by an intense constitutional crisis, they 
are themselves the essence of that crisis.”
In Part II, Chapter Four, the author has also dealt with 
the constitutional gaps and the arts of prerogative. To the 
extent relevant, it reads as follows (p. 82):
“Gaps in a constitution should not be seen as simply 
empty space. They amount to a substantial plenum of 
strategic content and meaning vital to the preservation 
of a constitution. Such interstices accommodate 
the abeyances within which the sleeping giants of 
potentially acute political conflict are communally 
maintained in slumber. Despite the absence of any 
documentary or material form, these abeyances are 
real, and are an integral part of any constitution. What 
remains unwritten and indeterminate can be just as 
much responsible for the operational character and 
restraining quality of a constitution as its more tangible 
and codified components.”
26. Where the Constitution has conceived a particular 
structure on certain institutions, the legislative bodies 
are bound to mould the statutes accordingly. Despite the 
constitutional mandate, if the legislative body concerned 
does not carry out the required structural changes in the 
statutes, then, it is the duty of the court to provide the 
statute with the meaning as per the Constitution. “[T]he 
job of the Supreme Court is not to expound the meaning 
of the Constitution but to provide it with meaning.” [ 
Walter Berns, “Government by Lawyers and Judges”, 
Commentary, June 1987, 18.] The reference obviously 
is to the United States Supreme Court. As a general rule 
of interpretation, no doubt, nothing is to be added to or 
taken from a statute. However, when there are adequate 
grounds to justify an inference, it is the bounden duty of 
the court to do so.

230
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“… It is a corollary to the general rule of literal 
construction that nothing is to be added to or taken 
from a statute unless there are adequate grounds 
to justify the inference that the legislature intended 
something which it omitted to express.” [Maxwell on 
Interpretation of Statutes (12th Edn.) 33.]
According to Lord Mersey in Thompson (Pauper) v. Goold 
and Co. [1910 AC 409 (HL)] : (AC p. 420)
“… It is a strong thing to read into an Act of Parliament, 
words which are not there, and in the absence of 
clear necessity it is a wrong thing to do.”
In the case of cooperative societies, after the Ninety-seventh 
Amendment, it has become a clear or strong necessity 
to do the strong thing of reading into the legislation, the 
constitutional mandate of the cooperative societies to be 
governed as democratic institutions.
“45. … The constitutional provisions have to be 
construed broadly and liberally having regard to the 
changed circumstances and the needs of time and 
polity.” [ The Constitutional Bench decision in State 
of W.B. v. Committee for Protection of Democratic 
Rights, (2010) 3 SCC 571, p. 591, para 45 : (2010) 
2 SCC (Cri) 401]
20.	 History is replete with such instances where, in absence of the 
constitutionally delineated office, the deputy or the in-charge 
incumbent has performed the functions relatable to the constitutional 
office. The idea behind it is that vacancy or absence, for whatever 
reason, may not bring the constitutional machinery to a standstill. 
Ultimately, the show must go on to ensure that institutional continuity 
is maintained. We may take judicial notice of a couple of historic 
events. For instance, when former President Dr. Zakir Hussain 
passed away while in office on 3rd May, 1969, Vice President V.V. 
Giri was sworn in as the Acting President. Later, when Vice President 
V.V. Giri resigned to contest for the presidential election, Hon’ble 
Mohammad Hidayatullah, the then CJI acted as the President of 
India. While acting as such, His Lordship appointed Shri Shanti 
Swaroop Dhavan as the Governor of West Bengal. Similarly, when 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
231
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
the former President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed passed away on 11th 
February, 1977 while in office, the then Vice President Sri B.D. Jatti 
acted as the President and performed all the presidential functions, 
including appointment of Judges. Pointedly, Sri B.D. Jatti, as the acting 
President, appointed Sri Manoj Kumar Mukherjee in June, 1977 as 
an Additional Judge of the High Court at Calcutta (who then went 
on to serve as the Chief Justices of the Allahabad High Court and 
the Bombay High Court, and was later elevated as a Judge of this 
Court). Obviously, such appointments could not have been nullified 
on the ground that the acting President, and not the President, had 
made such appointments. 
21.	 If we were to read the law in the manner proposed by Mr. Rohatgi, 
we would be left with a constitutional vacuum which, in the absence 
of the Chairman of the Council of States, or the Speaker of the House 
of People, as the case may be, would render the provisions of the 
Inquiry Act otiose in the given circumstance.
22.	 Thus, Issue II framed above must be answered in the affirmative; 
we unhesitatingly hold that the Deputy Chairman was competent to 
consider the notice and refuse admission of the motion. 
Issue III: What is the effect, if any, of the Deputy 
Chairman’s refusal to admit the motion on the validity of 
the Speaker’s action under Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act?
What, if the order of the Deputy Chairman, was to be held illegal?
23.	 Although the petitioner has not, as such, mounted any challenge 
to the decision of the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha in not 
admitting the motion, having regard to the gamut of arguments made, 
we deem it appropriate to proceed on the premise that the refusal 
of the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha to admit the motion is 
illegal (on a ground other than competence), and to examine what, 
if at all, would turn on such assumption. Prefatorily, we clarify that 
this exercise is to demonstrate that even on such a hypothetical 
plank, the edifice of the petitioner’s case does not materially improve.
24.	 In brief, the relief sought by the petitioner cannot follow, for the 
simple reason that the validity of the Speaker’s action does not 
hinge upon the correctness or otherwise of the decision taken by 
the Deputy Chairman.

232
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
25.	 As discussed by us in the preceding segment, the first proviso would 
spring into action only when notices of motion (given on the same 
day in both Houses) have been admitted in both Houses. 
26.	 The logical culmination, thus, is even if the refusal by the Deputy 
Chairman (performing the duties of the office of the Chairman of 
the Rajya Sabha) were to be ignored as legally unsustainable, the 
factual as well as legal position would still remain as it is: that, as 
on the date when the Speaker acted, there was no admitted motion 
pending in the Rajya Sabha. In the absence of an admitted motion 
in one House, the statutory sine qua non for the applicability of the 
proviso stood unfulfilled.
27.	 What, then, would be the consequence of holding the refusal by the 
Deputy Chairman to be bad in law? 
27.1.	 At the highest, a declaration that the Deputy Chairman of the 
Rajya Sabha had erred in the exercise of his statutory power 
by failing to act in accordance with law which would entail 
reconsideration of the notice by the Presiding Officer of the 
Rajya Sabha, in accordance with law. However, it cannot, 
retrospectively invalidate a lawful exercise of power already 
undertaken by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, which was 
founded on an admitted motion. 
27.2.	 Next, we ponder as to what is the error, if any, committed by 
the Speaker in this case. Facts noticed, reveal that the Speaker 
proceeded to constitute the Committee only after receiving an 
official communication that the notice given in the Rajya Sabha 
was not admitted by its Presiding Officer. The Speaker, in such 
a case, was adequately empowered to proceed in conformity 
with Section 3(2)(a), (b) and (c) of the Inquiry Act. 
27.3.	 Viewed from the perspective of parliamentary functioning, 
members of the Lok Sabha who initiated the motion were 
exercising constitutional responsibility in terms of Article 
124(4). Upon valid admission of their motion by the Speaker, 
they acquired a statutory entitlement to have the matter 
examined by a duly constituted committee. To interpret the 
statute in a manner that nullifies this entitlement due to 
procedural infirmities, assumed or real, in the other House, 
would tantamount to curtailing the participatory rights of 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
233
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
elected representatives without statutory warrant. Per contra, 
the members of the Rajya Sabha suffer no prejudice, by the 
Speaker’s action. They did have a right in law to claim that the 
notice given in the Rajya Sabha be dealt with in accordance with 
law by the competent authority. If at all they felt prejudiced, the 
decision of the Deputy Chairman refusing to admit the motion 
could have been laid to challenge by them. We assume that 
they did not prefer to challenge the decision because their 
purpose of having an inquiry conducted under the Inquiry Act 
stood fructified, once the Speaker admitted the motion of the 
Lok Sabha members and constituted the Committee. 
28.	 Thus, even if the act of the Deputy Chairman were to be held illegal 
and consequently set aside / or a reconsideration were ordered, the 
same would never result in restoration of the status quo ante. Even 
such limited declaratory relief, however, cannot be granted in the 
present case in the exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 32 of 
the Constitution (discussed in detail hereafter). 
The Prejudice Angle – need not be tested
29.	 With fervour, Mr. Mehta argued that the petitioner has not shown that 
any “demonstrable, gross or real prejudice” is caused to him owing 
to the Deputy Chairman’s decision not to admit the motion and that, 
in fact, such a decision operated to his benefit. The mere loss of a 
Joint Committee, absent mala fides or tangible disadvantage, does 
not amount to legal prejudice.
30.	 On the other hand, Mr. Rohatgi, by referring to the celebrated decision 
in S.L. Kapoor v. Jagmohan17 submitted that prejudice caused 
need not be separately established; non-observance of principles of 
natural justice is by itself sufficient proof of prejudice. He reminded 
us of the oft-quoted observation of Hon’ble O. Chinappa Reddy, J. 
(as His Lordship then was) that “(I)t ill comes from a person who 
has denied justice that the person who has been denied justice is 
not prejudiced”.
31.	 We have heard arguments that initiation of proceedings against the 
petitioner has caused irreparable reputational and constitutional 
17	
(1980) 4 SCC 379

234
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
prejudice and that the doctrine of “no prejudice” cannot apply where 
mandatory safeguards are violated. This argument presupposes 
illegality in the constitution of the Committee which, for reasons 
already discussed, we are unable to accept. Once the Committee 
is lawfully constituted, the statute itself provides for elaborate 
safeguards at the investigation stage, including framing of 
charges, opportunity of defence, cross-examination of witnesses, 
and adjudication by a body comprising of senior constitutional 
functionaries. At this nascent stage, no civil consequences follow; 
the motion itself remains pending and can succeed only if both 
Houses ultimately adopt it by the constitutionally mandated special 
majority. 
32.	 Mr. Mehta argued that constitution of a Single-House Committee 
instead of a Joint-Committee, on facts and in the circumstances, 
does not undermine the fairness of the procedure. We accept this 
submission. Reputational injury, howsoever unfortunate, cannot be 
a ground to subvert a constitutionally sanctioned statutory process, 
particularly when the Parliament has consciously designed a multi-
tiered safeguard structure before any adverse consequence can 
ensue.
33.	 We also find ourselves in complete accord with Mr. Mehta’s 
contention that the ultimate safeguard of Parliamentary approval 
under Article 124(4) also remains intact. Germane, it is, to note 
that even after the Committee submits its report, the constitutional 
and statutory scheme does not render the petitioner remediless or 
exposed to automatic consequences. The report, by itself, is neither 
determinative nor self-executory. Rather, it merely triggers the next 
stage of Parliamentary consideration, where the motion for removal, 
kept pending till then, is required to be taken up separately in each 
House and can culminate in an address to the President only upon 
satisfaction of the rigorous special majority stipulated under Article 
124(4) of the Constitution. Thus, in consideration of the edifice of 
the parties’ submissions, even from the standpoint of the petitioner, 
no vested or accrued right gets defeated.
34.	 Undoubtedly, the removal of a Judge of a High Court is constitutionally 
anchored in Article 217 read with Article 124 of the Constitution, with 
the procedural framework being provided by the Inquiry Act. That 
said, a grievance raised by a Judge, who, though a constitutional 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
235
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
functionary by virtue of the office held, is nonetheless a public 
servant, questioning the desirability, advisability or necessity of 
initiating proceedings, or alleging procedural infirmities therein, 
partakes the character of a service-related dispute. This Court has, 
in a long line of decisions, consistently held that every infraction of 
the rules governing discipline and control does not, by itself, vitiate 
disciplinary proceedings. A plea founded on infraction of procedure 
must necessarily be examined through the prism of prejudice, having 
regard to the nature of the rule alleged to have been infracted, 
namely, whether it is mandatory or merely directory. Such an enquiry 
presupposes the existence of infraction of a governing rule. In the 
present case, however, it is unnecessary to undertake such an 
exercise, for the petitioner has failed to establish infringement of 
any vested or accrued right.
Effect of not challenging the decision of the Deputy Chairman
35.	 The decision of the Deputy Chairman is not part of the writ petition 
because despite the petitioner asking for it, the same was not furnished 
to him. In fact, it is the petitioner’s claim that he derived knowledge 
of such decision once the counter affidavit to the writ petition came 
to be filed by the respondents. Acting in deference to our observation 
in Court on 7th January, 2026, the decision of the Deputy Chairman 
was placed on record simultaneously with furnishing a copy thereof 
to the petitioner. 
36.	 Upon receipt of the decision of the Deputy Chairman together with the 
“draft decision” of the Secretary General, Rajya Sabha, no exception 
has been taken by the petitioner, in black and white, either by 
amending his writ petition or by filing an affidavit obviously because 
the decision does not adversely affect him. Rather, the decision is 
in the petitioner’s favour in the sense that the Deputy Chairman did 
not, inter alia, find sufficient material to substantiate the claim of the 
notice givers that a case for removal of the petitioner from office by 
proceeding under the Inquiry Act had been set up. 
37.	 However, in course of oral hearing, the thrust of Mr. Rohatgi’s 
submission has been that the decision of the Deputy Chairman, for 
reasons urged, is non-est; therefore, the clock must be put back 
to explore a meeting of minds of the Presiding Officers of the two 
Houses for constitution of a Joint Committee. 

236
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
38.	 Acceptance of Mr. Rohatgi’s argument would essentially require us 
to not only examine the legality, propriety and/or correctness of the 
decision of the Deputy Chairman but to quash the same. 
39.	 The question as to whether a court can quash an order without the 
same being subjected to challenge came up for consideration in 
Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. Ltd. v. Sunita Mehra18. This Court 
held:
3. The short question that arises for consideration in this 
case is whether there being no challenge to the order of 
eviction passed by the Estate Officer under the Act, in the 
writ petition was the High Court justified in setting aside 
that order in appeal. It was urged that after the order of 
eviction was passed the writ petition was not amended 
by challenging the order of eviction passed by the Estate 
Officer. No ground as regards its invalidity was also stated. 
It is not disputed that the writ petition was not amended 
after the order of eviction was passed by the Estate 
Officer. Even in the letters patent appeal, the order of 
eviction was not made to form part of the records of the 
case and under such circumstances the Division Bench 
of the High Court was not legally justified in setting aside 
the order dated 24-2-1982 passed by the Estate Officer. 
Consequently, the appeal succeeds and is allowed. There 
shall be no order as to costs.
40.	 We are in agreement with the aforesaid view. If an order has been 
passed to the prejudice or detriment of a suitor and such suitor seeks 
to have the order declared invalid and quashed in writ proceedings, 
it is imperative that he lays the order to a challenge, makes specific 
averments and urges cogent legal grounds to demonstrate its invalidity 
to enable him claim relief based thereon. This is required to serve 
as a notice to the opponent as to what are the grounds likely to 
be urged based whereon the suitor would seek to have the order 
quashed. Unless the opponent is put to notice, he cannot, perhaps, 
by projecting his own imagination discover all that may be in the 
contemplation of the suitor to be used and established against the 
opponent. Once put to notice, the opponent is entitled to raise an 
18	
(2001) 9 SCC 344

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
237
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
effective defence in support of the order under challenge to persuade 
the court not to quash it. This is a very basic rule of essential justice, 
which serves twin purposes: (i) of abortion of any attempt to spring 
surprises at the hearing; and (ii) prevention of miscarriage of justice.
41.	 In Chandigarh Administration v. Laxman Roller Flour Mills (P) 
Ltd.19, this Court succinctly enunciated as follows:
4. A perusal of the relief extracted above shows that the 
writ petitioner-respondent never asked for any relief in the 
writ petition commanding the Chandigarh Administration 
to issue completion certificate in its favour. Learned 
counsel for the respondent frankly stated that there is no 
allegation in the writ petition to the effect that Chandigarh 
Administration has illegally withheld the completion 
certificate. It is settled law that unless the allegations are 
made in the writ petition and a relief to that effect is also 
prayed for in the writ petition, the High Court is not justified 
in issuing any order in excess of the relief prayed for in 
the writ petition. We are, therefore, satisfied that in the 
absence of pleading and prayer in the writ petition, the 
High Court fell in error in issuing directions to the appellant 
to issue completion certificate to the writ petitioner-
respondent. In such circumstances, we set aside the order 
of the High Court to the extent it directs the Chandigarh 
Administration to issue completion certificate to the writ 
petitioner-respondent. The appeal is thus allowed. There 
shall not be any order as to costs.
42.	 What has been laid down in Sunita Mehra (supra) and Chandigarh 
Administration (supra) in relation to exercise of writ power under 
Article 226 of the Constitution would equally extend to exercise of 
similar powers under Article 32. 
43.	 A profitable reference may be made in this regard to the decision of 
this Court in Amina Marwa Sabreen v. State of Kerala20 as far as 
exercise of writ jurisdiction under Article 32 is concerned. Relevant 
paragraphs from such decision read as follows:
19	
(1998) 8 SCC 326
20	
(2018) 14 SCC 193

238
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
14. Reverting to the preliminary objections raised by the 
respondent State, as already mentioned above, there is 
no reference to the G.O. in the entire writ petition. This 
document is not even part of the writ petition. Therefore, 
there are no foundational facts and/or pleadings in the writ 
petition challenging this G.O. as unconstitutional. More 
importantly, there is no prayer in the writ petition seeking 
quashing of this G.O. Even when the learned counsel 
for the State had pointed out fundamental infirmity in the 
writ petition, no attempt was made by the petitioners to 
amend the writ petition so as to incorporate challenge to 
the said G.O. as well. In the absence of any pleadings 
and the prayer seeking quashing of the said G.O., it is not 
permissible for the petitioners to seek a relief by making 
oral submissions in this behalf.
15. For the aforesaid reasons, we dismiss the writ petition 
on the ground of maintainability only as we do not deem it 
necessary to go into the issue on merits for lack of pleadings 
as well as requisite prayers in this behalf. No costs.
44.	 Tested on this anvil, the petitioner’s grievance plainly cannot be 
addressed. In the absence of any challenge to the decision of the 
Deputy Chairman, we find no reason to outlaw it.
45.	 It is trite that writ jurisdiction is exercised to test the legality of an 
existing order, and not to grant relief on the hypothesis that another 
authority ought to have acted differently. The Inquiry Act does not 
contemplate constitution of two committees by the Presiding Officers 
of both Houses, as rightly pointed out by Mr. Mehta. Thus, if at all, 
two committees are constituted, one each by one Presiding Officer 
of a House, to investigate common allegations against a Judge, 
any right can accrue to the Judge to question such constitution as 
well as the legality of the subsequent process or outcome. This is 
because the legal framework does not allow parallel proceedings 
by two committees. Such an occurrence could be rare and if the 
occasion therefor arises, certainly the court may interfere. However, 
that obviously is not the case here. Judicial interference, bearing 
in mind the stage the proceedings have reached, would amount to 
travelling beyond the pleadings and trenching upon areas where 
no enforceable legal injury has yet arisen. The settled limits of 
writ jurisdiction do not permit the Court to confer relief in vacuum, 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
239
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
divorced from a direct challenge to the order which is alleged to be 
the source of illegality.
Issue IV: Draft decision prepared by the Secretary-General
of the Rajya Sabha – whether justified in law?
46.	 For the limited purpose of future cases of a similar nature, and for 
no other purpose whatsoever, we briefly record our opinion on the 
procedure leading to the decision of the Deputy Chairman. It is 
clarified in unequivocal terms that this discussion is purely academic 
and shall not, directly or indirectly, be relied upon or invoked to claim 
any benefit, leverage, or advantage by the petitioner.
47.	 We were furnished with a certified copy of the decision taken by the 
Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha declining to admit the motion. 
The document, spanning seven pages, comprises fifteen numbered 
paragraphs and one unnumbered paragraph. The fifteen numbered 
paragraphs set out what is described as a “draft decision of the 
Chair,” concluding that the notice was not “in order,” which was 
thereafter placed before the Deputy Chairman for approval. In the 
unnumbered paragraph, the Deputy Chairman expressly concurred 
with the decision of the Secretary General in the following terms:
“Having carefully considered the facts of the case and legal 
position enunciated above, I agree with the conclusion 
drawn. The Notice given by Hon’ble MPs is found to be 
not in order and, thus, not admitted. Secretary-General, 
Lok Sabha, may be informed accordingly.”
48.	 Upon a reading of the document in open court, we expressed our 
prima facie reservations regarding the conduct of the Secretary 
General in holding the notice to be not “in order”. The same were not 
fully addressed by the submissions advanced by Mr. Mehta. For the 
reasons set out in the paragraphs that follow, we are unable to find 
a clear legal basis for the course of action adopted by the Secretary 
General. To facilitate a clearer understanding of this conclusion, we 
deem it appropriate to reproduce paragraph 14 of the said document, 
which sets out the reasons on the basis of which the Secretary 
General found the notice to be not “in order”:
“11. Pursuant to the directions of the then Chairman, a 
closer scrutiny of the said Notice of Motion was undertaken, 
which revealed the following deficiencies:

240
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(i)	
The said Notice of Motion is not drawn in proper 
terms to elicit a decision of the House;
(ii)	
The said Notice of Motion has relied on certain 
documents and material facts. However, no such 
authenticated copy of these documents and 
reports has been enclosed for consideration of 
the Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
(iii)	 The prayer in the said Notice of Motion request 
that “the present Motion under section 3(1)(b) 
of the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 ought to be 
admitted in the House”. However, section 3 (1) 
(b) of the Act provides that “the Speaker or, 
as the case may be, the Chairman may, after 
consulting such persons, if any, as he thinks 
fit and after considering such materials, if any, 
as may be available to him, either admit the 
motion or refuse to admit the same”. It may be 
seen that section 3 (1) (b) gives discretion to 
admit or refuse to admit the Notice of Motion 
to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha and not to the 
House. Accordingly, an incorrect provision has 
been invoked in the prayer in the said Notice 
of Motion invoking incorrect provision of the Act 
display a casual and cavalier approach to an 
extremely serious matter.
(iv)	 The Notice of Motion also contains certain 
factual inaccuracies. In the ‘Sequence of 
Events’, it is stated that “… on 3 March, 
2025, the three-member In-House Committee 
conducted a spot inspection at the site of the 
incident, during which electronic evidence was 
examined and statement of 55 witnesses were 
record (sic. recorded). Based on the findings, 
a report was finalized and submitted to the 
Hon’ble Chief Justice of India on 5 May 2025. 
This 64-page report was published in the public 
domain by multiple news portals on 19 June, 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
241
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
2025”. It needs to be seen that the impugned 
fire incident at the residence of Justice xxxx 
occurred on the night of 14 March, 2025. It 
is highly unlikely that the spot inspection could 
have taken place on 3rd March, 2025 i.e. the 
day before the fire incident. Further, in absence 
of any material record appended with their said 
Notice of Motion, it is not possible to determine 
the veracity of these facts. 
(emphasis supplied in original)
49.	 The material placed by the Secretary General before the Deputy 
Chairman raises certain concerns. First, there appears to be an 
insistence on the use of ‘proper terms’ for the notice, a requirement 
which does not find express recognition in law. Secondly, a 
requirement seems to have been read into the law for furnishing 
authenticated documents in support of the material facts, which, 
particularly in view of documents already in the public domain, may 
not have been necessary at that stage. In any event, the substance 
of the allegations was required to be considered, as there was no 
statutory obligation upon the notice-givers to produce supporting 
evidence at that juncture. Thirdly, exception appears to have been 
taken to an incorrect reference to a statutory provision, without due 
appreciation of the legal position governing the subject. Fourthly, 
the Secretary General appears to have examined the correctness of 
the facts pleaded, including with reference to certain dates, thereby 
traversing beyond the scope of his designated role. The Inquiry Act 
does not contemplate a substantive assessment of the merits of the 
allegations by the Secretariat of a House. The Secretary General’s 
role was expected to remain confined to administrative scrutiny, such 
as verification of procedural compliance, and could not extend to 
assuming a quasi-adjudicatory function.
50.	 It is relevant to note that neither the Inquiry Act nor the Rules framed 
thereunder prescribe a mandatory form for a notice of motion. In the 
absence of defined parameters, it is not readily apparent on what 
basis the Secretary General concluded that the Notice of Motion was 
not ‘in order.’ Where no prescribed format exists, a notice containing 
allegations of impropriety against a Judge could not reasonably be 

242
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
treated as ineffective solely on account of perceived deficiencies in 
drafting or form. The role of the Secretary General was confined 
to placing the notice before the competent authority, namely, the 
office of the Chairman, without expressing any conclusion as to its 
admissibility.
51.	 That the Secretary General went beyond a purely administrative 
role is apparent from the language employed in the document itself. 
The concluding paragraph (paragraph 15) thereof states: “A draft 
decision of the Chair, indicating the aforesaid Notice of Motion not 
being in order and hence, non est is accordingly placed for approval. 
Subject to its approval, a communication would be sent to Secretary-
General, Lok Sabha”. (emphasis ours)
52.	 Without venturing further into the matter, we consider it appropriate 
to note that the manner in which the notice of motion was processed 
at the Secretariat level does not fully align with the role contemplated 
under law.
53.	 That said, we repeat, these observations are confined solely to the 
procedural aspects noted above and are occasioned by the particular 
course of action adopted at the Secretariat level. Since the decision 
of the Deputy Chairman declining to admit the motion is not under 
challenge, and has been taken independently in accordance with 
his constitutional role, these observations do not, in any manner, 
impinge upon or affect the validity of that decision.
54.	 We do hope that no other Judge faces proceedings for his removal 
from service on allegations of misbehaviour. Should, at all, there 
be an unfortunate recurrence of a Judge prima facie indulging in 
misbehaviour and the representatives of the people of the nation 
demand an investigation based on allegations of misbehaviour, it 
would be just and proper if Secretariat exercises restraint and leaves 
it to the Speaker of the Lok Sabha or the Chairman of the Rajya 
Sabha, as the case may be, to decide the question of admission 
of a motion instead of concluding as to what should be the future 
course of action. 
SO FAR
Issue I : Does the first proviso to Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act 
require the constitution of a Joint Committee where notices, having 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
243
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
been given in both Houses on the same day, is later followed by 
refusal to admit the motion by the Presiding Officer of one House and 
admission of the motion by the Presiding Officer of the other House?
	
¾
No, it does not. The proviso applies to only one specific 
situation, namely, where notices of motion given on the 
same day have been admitted by both Houses. It does not 
restrict or negate the individual authority of either House 
of Parliament.
Issue II : Whether the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha was 
competent to refuse admission of the notice of motion?
	
¾
Yes, he was.
Issue III : What is the effect, if any, of the Deputy Chairman’s refusal 
to admit the motion on the validity of the Speaker’s action under 
Section 3(2) of the Inquiry Act?
	
¾
There is no need to examine this issue, as the order of 
the Deputy Chairman is not under challenge. Arguendo, 
even if it were examined, it would have no effect, since 
the Speaker committed no illegality in constituting the 
committee.
Issue IV: Whether the draft decision prepared by the Secretary-
General of the Rajya Sabha recording that the notice of motion given 
to the Chairman is not “in order” justified in law?
	
¾
No; does not align with the procedure contemplated under 
law.
Issue V : Whether the petitioner is entitled to any relief?
55.	 The extraordinary remedy under Article 32 is confined to enforcement 
of Fundamental Rights and does not extend to issuing advisory or 
corrective directions in relation to internal statutory mechanisms 
of the Parliament, where no present or inevitable infraction of any 
Fundamental Right is evinced. Petitioner is, thus, not entitled to 
any relief.
CONCLUSION
56.	 For the foregoing reasons, no interference is called for. The present 
writ petition stands dismissed. 

244
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
APPENDIX- I
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONER
A.	
CHALLENGE BEFORE THE HON’BLE COURT
1.	
The Petition challenges the unilateral constitution of the Judges 
Inquiry Committee (“JIC”) by the Speaker under Section 3(2) of 
the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 (the “Act”) on 12.08.2025 after 
admitting a motion given in the Lok Sabha on 21.07.2025 seeking 
removal of the Petitioner as a Judge, despite a motion presented 
in the Rajya Sabha on the same day not having been admitted 
(as communicated to retitioner during the course of hearing). 
The motion was stated to have been “not admitted” in the Rajya 
Sabha on 11.08.2025 pursuant to a scrutiny undertaken by the 
Secretary General of the Rajya Sabha and affirmed by the Deputy 
Chairman, purportedly seeking to derive authority from Article 91 
of the Constitution of India.
2.	
Petitioner contends that the action of the Speaker is contrary to the 
first proviso of Section 3(2) of the Act, thus vitiating the constitution 
of the JIC and all consequential proceedings. This, since where 
notices of motion are given on the same day before both Houses 
of Parliament, the JIC could not have been constituted unless (a) 
both Houses had admitted the motions; and (b) a JIC constituted 
thereafter jointly by the Hon’ble Speaker and Hon’ble Chairman.
3.	
It is further submitted that the Deputy Chairman could not have 
exercised the powers comprised in Section 3(2) which stands 
exclusively reserved in the Hon’ble Chairman as the persona 
designata. Article 91 is merely a pro tem measure limited to ensuring 
continuity of proceedings in the House and cannot extend to statutory 
powers solely exercisable by the Hon’ble Chairman.
B.	
PETITION IS MAINTAINABLE
4.	
Contrary to the counter-affidavit, during oral arguments, Respondents 
did not challenge the maintainability of the Petition. In any event, it is 
settled law that all processes relating to the removal of a Judge under 
the Act [up until the point proceedings in the House(s) commence 
upon submission of a Report by the JIC] are proceedings outside 
the House, amenable to judicial review as these flow from Article 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
245
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
124(5), and not Articles 118, 119 or 122 [Sub-Committee on Judicial 
Accountability v. UoI [(1991) 4 SCC 699 - paras 76-79, 81-82, 86, 
91 & 93-101].
C.	
CONSTITUTION OF JIC IS CONTRARY TO LAW
5.	
Indisputably, the Act is a plenary and comprehensive legislation 
referable to Article 124(5) and thus liable to be strictly construed. 
The scheme of the Act, broadly, conceives of four different parts to 
the process of removal.
a.	
Introduction [Section 3(1)]: All Members of Parliament have a 
right to present notices of motion seeking removal of a Judge. 
Where motions are endorsed by a specific number of Members 
[100 in the Lok Sabha, 50 in Rajya Sabha], it leads to the next 
step — consideration of the motion by the Speaker or Chairman 
to decide whether it merits admission.
b.	
Admission / Rejection [Sections 3(1) and (2)]: The admission or 
rejection of a motion is a statutory power of immense moment 
and thus vested in two high constitutional functionaries, namely, 
the Speaker and Chairman who are to independently assess 
and evaluate whether the notice of motion merits admission 
and the initiation of further steps under the Inquiry Act.
c.	
Committee Formation and Report (Sections 3-5): In the event 
a motion is admitted, it is kept pending enabling the Hon’ble 
Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, to constitute a 
three-member committee for inquiring into the allegations. This 
committee must conduct an inquiry as per the provisions of 
the Act and its Rules and furnish its report within the specified 
time-frame.
d.	
Consideration of Report and Address (Section 6): Only if the 
report of the committee recommends the removal of the Judge, 
would it then be transmitted for discussion by Members in 
the Houses, which may thereafter resolve to present a joint 
address to the President of India seeking removal of the Judge 
in question.
6.	
Section 3 constitutes the fulcrum of the legislation, and covers the 
entire field of presentation and consideration of motions. Since it 
constitutes a constitutional safeguard, it is liable to be interpreted 

246
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
strictly. It exhausts all contemplated scenarios on the giving of motions, 
namely: (i) motion in one House alone; (ii) motions in both Houses 
on ditterent days (in which case the second proviso applies); and 
(iii) motions given in both the Houses on the same day (triggering 
the first proviso). Undisputedly, in the present case motions were 
given on the same day in both the Houses and the challenge thus 
centers upon the first proviso.
7.	
As per the Petitioner, the JIC could not have been constituted unless 
both the Speaker and the Chairman had admitted the motions in both 
Houses and only thereafter proceeded to constitute the JIC jointly. The 
use of double peremptory negatives (“no” committee and “unless”) is 
evidence of a manifest intent to underscore its mandatory and non-
derogable character [Fuleshwar Gope v. Uol [2024 SCC OnLine 
SC 2610 - para 27; Vijay Narayan Thatte v. State of Maharashtra 
(2009) 9 SCC 92 - paras 5, 10, 12, 13, 14 & 15].
8.	
Since the power to admit a motion stands conferred upon two co-
equal constitutional authorities, the statute mandates concurrence 
to avoid conflicting decisions, separate committees coming to be 
constituted or parallel inquiries being initiated. A decision not to admit 
if taken by one of those authorities would undoubtedly cast a cloud 
of invalidity on the other. It is these considerations which inform the 
mandate of concerted action.
9.	
Implicit in the first proviso is the situation where one motion is 
rejected and one admitted. In such a situation the motion would 
clearly fail and cannot be proceeded with. Lapsing of a motion is 
a consequence that follows not only from the plain and exhaustive 
words of the proviso but also from the fact that both the Houses 
are equal and the determination of the Speaker and Chairman (as 
the case may be) to not admit a motion cannot be overridden or 
overruled by a contrary view of the other functionary. To read the 
proviso as not providing for that consequence would mean that 
Section 3 is incomplete.
10.	 It would be incorrect and inconceivable to assume that Parliament was 
either not cognizant or unaware of such a possibility or conundrum 
even though it chose to introduce a specific provision to deal with 
motions presented on the same date and promulgated a complete 
and exhaustive code. Legislative oversight cannot be readily assumed 
or inferred.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
247
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
11.	 The admission of both motions is not liable to be read as a condition 
precedent for the applicability of the first proviso. This condition is 
indelibly linked to the expression ‘no committee shall be constituted…’. 
If the Inquiry Act were to be interpreted in any other manner, it would 
compel one to hold that it fails to provide for a situation where one 
of the motions presented on the same day is rejected. This, despite 
the Inquiry Act having been acknowledged to be a complete code, 
a comprehensive legislation on the subject of removal, and Section 
3 thereof constituting its center piece.
12.	 Respondents’ interpretation that the first proviso applies only 
when both motions are “admitted” is wrong. This interpretation 
seeks to introduce the phrase ‘given and admitted’ into the statute 
and contradicts settled principles of statutory interpretation [G 
Narayanaswami v. G Pannerselvam, (1972) 3 SCC 717 – para 
18-20]. This more so since adhering to the plain text of the 
statute does not lead either to absurdity or to any unworkable 
situations.
13.	 Respondents’ contention that there is no prejudice caused due 
to non-compliance with the statute cannot be countenanced 
[S.L. Kapoor v. Jagmohan, (1980) 4 SCC 379]. The doctrine 
of prejudice or useless formality has no application to mandatory 
statutory safeguards and more so when we are concerned with 
salutary constitutional safeguards. Petitioner is facing removal 
proceedings even though one of the two similar and identical 
motions were found not to warrant further consideration. The mere 
fact that an adverse report may ultimately be placed before both 
Houses cannot justify a Judge being subjected to a process which 
is constitutionally infirm and unwarranted. Additionally, the mere right 
of addressing both Houses at a belated stage cannot overcome the 
prejudice caused. Last but not the least, the reputational damage 
caused as a result of the impugned proceedings is prejudice in 
itself.
D.	
CONSIDERATION OF RAJYA SABHA MOTION IS CONTRARY 
TO LAW
14.	 The Rajya Sabha motion was “not admitted” by the Deputy Chairman 
on 11.08.2025. No formal order to this effect has been communicated 
or supplied to Petitioner. The file notings supplied demonstrate 

248
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
that the consideration on the motion was by the Secretary General 
(Respondent No. 2) and merely “affirmed” by the Deputy Chairman.
15.	 Petitioner submits that the Deputy Chairman lacked authority to 
exercise any powers in respect of the motion given on 21.07.2025. 
The Act defines “Chairman” and “Speaker” exhaustively by using the 
categorical “means”, rather than the fluid or expansive “means and 
includes”. The use of “means” is intended to be an explicit statement 
of the full connotation of a term, thus, leaving no room for ambiguity. 
The definitions (absent in the Bill) were included in the Act to “ensure 
and maintain the independence of the judiciary” [Joint Committee 
Report on the Judges (Inquiry) Bill, 1964]. Where any role was 
perceived for the Deputies, it had been specifically carved out (See 
Rules 16 & 17, Judges Inquiry Rules, 1969) and which too is plainly 
a limited, expressly defined role, confined to proceedings in the 
House after the submission of the JIC Report.
16.	 Article 91 confers only limited, pro tem authority relating to proceedings 
in the House and cannot extend to statutory functions under the Act. 
Parliament was conscious of Article 91 and still adopted exhaustive 
definitions under the Act reserving admission powers in the Speaker/
Chairman alone as persona designata. The Parliament appears to 
have been guided inter alia by Article 100 which gives only a casting 
vote to the Speaker/Chairman (unlike a member of the House including 
the Deputy Chairman who can sign the motion and vote on it if the 
Report calls for removal of the Judge).
17.	 Further, unlike Article 65(3) which effects a complete substitution 
of authority, Article 91 envisages only a pro tem role. Accepting 
the Respondents’ contention would mean that any other member” 
temporarily presiding over House proceedings (in the absence of 
the Deputy Chairman) could also exercise powers under Section 3. 
This would clearly be contrary to the import and intent of the 
statute.
Therefore, Petitioner submits that for all the reasons set out above. 
the constitution of the JIC is liable to be declared non est, and this 
Hon’ble Court ought to allow the present petition.
Filed on: 12.01.2026
Place: New Delhi.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
249
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
APPENDIX- II
SHORT NOTE
ON BEHALF OF TUSHAR MEHTA, SOLICITOR GENERAL OF 
INDIA
A.	
PRELIMINARY SUBMISSIONS
1.	
The Petitioner has assailed the action of the Hon’ble Speaker 
admitting the notice of motion on 12.08.2025 and the constitution 
of a three-member Inquiry Committee under Section 3(2) of the 
Judges (Inquiry) Act, 1968 (“Act”). It is the Petitioner’s case that 
since notices of motion were “given” in both Houses on the same 
day, the proviso to Section 3(2) mandated that no Committee could 
be constituted unless the motion was admitted in both Houses 
and, if admitted, the Committee must be constituted jointly by the 
Speaker and the Chairman.
2.	
It is respectfully submitted that the Writ Petition is misconceived and 
founded on an erroneous reading of the statutory scheme. At the 
outset, the Respondents’ have divided their arguments broadly on 
the following four issues :
a.	
The proviso to Section 3(2) of the Act is attracted only where 
the motions are “admitted” in both Houses, and not just being 
“given”
b.	
In any event, the Petitioner demonstrates no real, demonstrable 
and gross prejudice so as to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction 
of this Hon’ble Court under Article 32; and
c.	
The Rajya Sabha motion was, upon scrutiny, expressly “not 
admitted” by the Deputy Chairman, who was validly acting as 
the Chairman under Article 91 when the office fell vacant and 
was constitutionally and statutorily permitted to exercise such a 
power. This order is not and could not have been challenged.
B.	
INTERPRETATION OF PROVISO TO SECTION 3(2)
3.	
It is respectfully submitted that Articles 121 and 211 of the Constitution 
prohibit any discussion in the House with regard to the conduct of 
any judge of the Supreme Court or the High Court, except upon a 

250
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the 
removal of the Judge. A perusal of Article 124(4) read with Article 
217 and 218, makes it crystal clear that a Judge of the Supreme 
Court or the High Court cannot be removed from office except on 
the ground of proven misbehaviour or incapacity.
4.	
Therefore, the constitutional scheme for removal of a Judge 
culminating in an order of the Hon’ble President is passed only 
after an address by each House of Parliament supported by a 
majority of the total membership of that House and by a majority 
of not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting, 
ensuring stringent thresholds that operate as a substantive inbuilt 
safeguard. It ensures that such motions for removal of Judges are 
not initiated in a routine manner and that the process is insulated 
against proceedings founded on frivolous allegations, extraneous 
considerations or patently false claims.
5.	
It is thus respectfully submitted that by virtue of Article 122, these 
notices of motion cannot be impugned in a court of law as long as 
they do not contravene any constitutional or statutory mandate.
6.	
The Act incorporates an important safeguard in Section 3(1) by 
drawing a clear distinction between a motion being “given” and its 
subsequent “admission”. A motion does not automatically set the 
statutory machinery in motion merely upon being “given”. It is only 
upon “admission” that the statutory consequence of constituting a 
three-member Committee follows. The Legislature has, therefore, 
consciously used two distinct expressions, and the language 
employed is the determinative factor of the legislative intention. At 
this stage, it is also pertinent to note that, as per Rule 2(e) of the 
Judges (Inquiry) Rules, 1969, “motion” is defined to mean the motion 
admitted under Section 3(1).
7.	
As per Section 3(1) of the Act, “giving” a motion is essentially 
a ministerial act of presentation/filing, whereas “admission” is 
a substantive, independent decision that necessarily entails due 
scrutiny and application of mind by the Speaker or the Chairman after 
consulting such person, if any, as he thinks fit. Thus, the Speaker 
or the Chairman has an option either to admit the motion or refuse 
to admit the motion.
8.	
This Hon’ble Court in P.D. Dinakaran (2) v. Judges Inquiry 
Committee, (2011) 8 SCC 474 had held that the Speaker/Chairman, is 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
251
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
not bound to admit the motion submitted with the requisite numerical 
strength as a matter of course because he had the discretion under 
the Act to consult such persons as he may think fit and consider 
any material which is made available to him before taking a decision 
on the admission of motion. This Hon’ble Court also held that, in a 
given case, he may even choose to refuse to admit the motion.21
9.	
It is crucial to highlight that this Hon’ble Court in Sarojini Ramaswami 
(Mrs) v. Union of India, (1992) 4 SCC 506 has also held the following:
95. “.....The law so enacted under Article 124(5) provides 
that any accusation made against a sitting judge to enable 
initiation of the process of his removal from office has to 
be only by not less than the minimum number of Members 
of Parliament specified in the Act, all other methods being 
excluded. On initiation of the process in the prescribed 
manner, the Speaker/Chairman is to decide whether the 
accusation requires investigation. If he chooses not to 
act on the accusation made in the form of motion by the 
specified minimum number of Members of Parliament, 
the matter ends there. On the other hand, if the Speaker/
Chairman, on a consideration of the materials available 
and after consulting such persons as he thinks fit, forms 
the opinion that a prima facie case for investigation 
into the accusation against the Judge is made out, he 
constitutes a Committee of judicial functionaries in 
accordance with Section 3(2) of the Act.”
10.	 If this condition of an independent application of mind with an order 
“admitting” the motion is not read, there is a possibility of members 
gathering mere requisite numerical strength “filing” motions even on 
the basis of some unpopular judgment given by a Judge resulting 
in the appointment of a Committee. Such a reading of Section 3(1) 
would render a mere achievement of numerical strength as the only 
condition precedent for forming a Committee under Section 3(2), 
rendering the second part of Section 3(1) otiose.
11.	 Further, it is humbly submitted that in the absence of a mandatory 
requirement of independent scrutiny culminating in a formal order of 
21	
Paragraphs 26 & 31 of P.D. Dinakaran (2). See also Krishna Swami v. Union of India, (1992) 4 SCC 
605 ¶45.

252
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
“admitting” the motion, the statutory safeguard would be rendered 
illusory. Mere fulfilment of the numerical strength of the members 
could trigger the process of removal by simply “giving” the notice 
of motion, even on the basis of an unpopular judgment given by a 
Judge, thereby mechanically leading to the constitution of a Committee 
without any threshold assessment of whether the motion warrants 
such grave proceedings.
12.	 The procedure contemplated in the Act is sui generis and will have 
to be interpreted in view of the constitutional scheme in general 
and Articles 121 and 211 in particular. Section 3(2) of the Act also 
specifically and consciously uses the word “if the motion referred to 
in subsection (1) is admitted”. This further highlights the significance 
of “admission” of the motion, which is different from mere “giving” of 
the motion. It thus provides that if a motion for removal of a Judge 
is admitted by the Speaker or the Chairman, the Speaker or the 
Chairman shall keep the motion pending and “constitute, as soon 
as may be,” a three-member Committee to investigate the grounds 
for removal of a judge.
13.	 It is pertinent to note that the proviso to Section 3(2) stipulates 
that where notices of a motion are given on the same day in both 
Houses of Parliament, “no Committee shall be constituted unless 
the motion has been admitted in both Houses” and it is only when 
the motion is admitted in both Houses, that the Committee shall be 
constituted jointly by the Speaker and the Chairman. Thus, when 
notices of motion are initiated simultaneously in both Houses, the 
law envisages a joint action only if both Houses admit the motion. 
The proviso is intended to avoid two committees being constituted 
simultaneously to inquire into the same allegations, which may result 
in conflicting views.
14.	 The logical corollary of this is that when notices of motion are given 
on the same day, but only admitted by one House and rejected by 
the other House, then the Speaker/Chairman, as the case may be, 
who admits the motion is well within its statutory right to keep it 
pending and constitute a Committee as per Section 3(2) of the Act.
15.	 In the facts of the present case, notices of motion were indeed 
submitted on the same day, i.e., 21 July 2025, in both Houses of 
Parliament. On the one hand, the notice of motion for removal given 
in the Lok Sabha was received by the Hon’ble Speaker at 12:30 pm 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
253
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
and was signed by 146 members belonging to different political 
parties. On the other hand, the notice of motion given in the Rajya 
Sabha was signed by 62 members, and the then Chairman made 
an announcement in the House between 4:07 pm to 4:19 pm. The 
address of the then Chairman makes it evidently clear that he was 
neither “admitting” the motion nor “refusing to admit” the motion.22 
Moreover, the Hon’ble Law Minister had also informed the Chairman 
that another motion was given in the Lok Sabha, pursuant to which 
the Chairman directed the Secretary General to “take necessary 
steps in this direction”.
16.	 It is pertinent to note that the then Chairman of the Rajya Sabha 
resigned as the Vice-President on 21 July 2025, and the Deputy 
Chairman assumed charge under Article 91 of the Constitution. Upon 
scrutiny of the notice, the Deputy Chairman, on 11 August 2025, 
concluded that the motion contained infirmities and that the notice was 
not in order and thus not admitted. The Hon’ble Deputy Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha, directed that the Secretary General, Lok Sabha, may 
be informed accordingly. This decision of refusal to admit the motion 
was communicated in writing by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat to the 
Lok Sabha Secretariat on the same day, i.e. 11 August 2025.
17.	 Thus, after following the due process, the Speaker admitted the 
motion received from members of the Lok Sabha and made an 
announcement to this effect on 12 August 2025 and kept it pending 
for inquiry. Accordingly, considering the fact that Rajya Sabha’s 
motion was not admitted, on 12 August 2025, only one House, i.e., 
Lok Sabha, had an admitted motion for the removal of the Petitioner.
18.	 Therefore, the requirement of a joint committee under the proviso to 
Section 3(2) was not triggered in these circumstances. The proviso 
operates only when (i) notices of motion are given on the same day 
and (ii) both the Houses admit the motion. The Hon’ble Speaker, before 
constituting the Committee, waited for the Rajya Sabha’s decision, 
and only when he was formally informed that the Rajya Sabha motion 
was not admitted, the Committee was constituted on 12 August 2025.
19.	 It is pertinent to note that while the proviso bars constituting a Committee 
unless both Houses admit the motion, it nowhere says that the rejection 
22	
The then Chairman, specifically mentioned that “Then the right of the Speaker or the Chairman to 
admit or reject the motion is not there” (Pg. 47 of the Petition @ Para 1).

254
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
of a motion in one House automatically invalidates an admitted motion 
in the other. To hold otherwise would allow one House’s refusal to 
admit the motion (potentially even a nefarious rejection) to defeat the 
removal process approved by the other House, which is neither the 
intent of the law nor a reasonable interpretation of the proviso.
20.	 The Petitioner’s contention that the constitution of the Committee 
is invalid “because the motion was not admitted in both Houses” is 
misplaced. Such a situation arose only because the Rajya Sabha’s 
motion failed to meet the threshold for admission. The law does not 
prohibit the Speaker from acting on a properly admitted motion of 
one House when the notice of motion given in the other House did 
not culminate in an admission. It is humbly submitted that any other 
interpretation would undermine the removal process by effectively 
giving one House a veto over the initiation of an inquiry, even where 
the other House has fulfilled all statutory requirements.
21.	 At this juncture, it is submitted that it is a settled law that a proviso 
has to be understood from the language used in the main provision 
and not vice versa. Moreover, it is also a settled law that if the 
substantive provision is clear on fair interpretation, the language in 
the proviso cannot be used to defeat the basic intent expressed in 
the said provision.23
C.	
DEMONSTRATIVE, GROSS AND REAL PREJUDICE SHOULD 
BE SHOWN FOR INVOKING ARTICLE 32
22.	 It is submitted that the Petitioner has not shown any “demonstrable, 
gross or real prejudice” caused to him by the manner in which the 
process for removal has been initiated, even if a purported procedural 
lapse is assumed to have taken place. It is submitted that such 
a demonstrable, gross or real prejudice must be proved by the 
Petitioner.24 In substance, the Petitioner’s complaint is that he lost 
23	
See Dwarka Prasad v. Dwarka Das Saraf, (1976) 1 SCC 128 ¶16; Vishesh Kumar v. Shanti Prasad, 
(1980) 2 SCC 378 ¶9; S. Sundaram Pillai v. V.R. Pattabiraman, (1985) 1 SCC 591 ¶27; J.K. Industries 
Ltd. v. Chief Inspector of Factories and Boilers, (1996) 6 SCC 665 ¶35; Director of Education 
(Secondary) v. Pushpendra Kumar; (1998) 5 SCC 192 ¶8; Rohitash Kumar v. Om Prakash Sharma, 
(2013) 11 SCC 451 ¶20.
24	
See ECIL v. B. Karunakar, (1993) 4 SCC 727 ¶30[v]; State Bank of Patiala v. S.K. Sharma, (1996) 3 
SCC ¶28, 33(3) & 33(7); State of U.P. v. Sudhir Kumar Singh, (2021) 19 SCC 706 ¶36 & 42.1-42.5; S.P. 
Gupta v. U.P. State Electricity Board, (1991) 2 SCC 263 ¶5; State of Karnataka v. Sri Darshan, 2025 
SCC OnLine 1702 ¶20.1.3-20.1.7; L&T Housing Financing Limited v. Trishul Developers, (2020) 10 
SCC 659 ¶19.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
255
X v. O/o Speaker of the House of People & Ors.
the “benefit” of a joint committee constituted by both the Speaker and 
the Chairman. However, this does not translate into any prejudice 
or a real or demonstrable disadvantage.
23.	 The Committee constituted by the Speaker is a duly authorized body 
formed strictly in conformity with Section 3(2) (a), (b) and (c) of the 
Act. The Committee is bound to conduct its investigation fairly and 
give the Petitioner full opportunity to be heard. The Petitioner remains 
entitled to submit his defence, adduce evidence, cross-examine 
witnesses and respond to any allegations before this Committee, in 
the same manner as he would before a joint committee.
24.	 It is respectfully submitted that the ultimate safeguard of Parliamentary 
approval under Article 124(4) also remains intact. Even if the 
Committee holds that the Judge is guilty of any misbehaviour or 
suffers from any incapacity, then the motion, along with the report of 
the Committee, would be taken up for consideration by the Houses 
of Parliament. Removal of a Judge cannot take place except by an 
order of the President passed after an address by each House of 
Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that 
House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members 
of the House present and voting. Therefore, a procedural divergence 
(a single-House Committee as opposed to a Joint Committee) does 
not undermine the fairness of the process or the Petitioner’s ability to 
defend himself. He suffers no substantive disadvantage at this stage.
25.	 It is submitted that the proviso to Section 3(2) is primarily for avoiding 
an anomalous situation arising out of a possibility of two simultaneous 
committees being appointed and to avoid a contingency where two 
motions remain “pending” with two different committees investigating 
the same act. The proviso does not confer any right on anyone, 
including the recipient of the charge memo by the Committee. The 
real purpose behind the proviso is for the benefit of the members.
26.	 When the constitution of the Committee jointly does not confer any 
right, there can be no prejudice. The prejudice can possibly arise in the 
event that both motions are given on the same day and are admitted, 
and the Speaker or the Chairman alone constitute a Committee.
27.	 The extraordinary remedy under Article 32 of the Constitution is 
available only to address breaches of fundamental rights or patent 
gross injustice. In the present case, the Petitioner’s grievances are 

256
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
at best technical and procedural. He has not pointed to any breach 
of his fundamental rights. It is submitted that the Petitioner’s rights 
are safeguarded by the presence of an impartial and independent 
Committee and the multiple stages of decision-making that lie ahead.
D.	
DEPUTY CHAIRMAN TO EXERCISE THE FUNCTIONS OF 
THE CHAIRMAN WHEN THE OFFICE IS VACANT AS PER 
ARTICLE 91 OF THE CONSTITUTION
28.	 It is submitted that Article 91(1) of the Constitution of India explicitly 
provides for the contingency where the office of Chairman of the 
Rajya Sabha is vacant. In such a case, the duties of the office 
shall be performed by the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. 
The Constitution thus, ensures that the absence or vacancy of the 
Chairman does not paralyze the functioning of the House. The Deputy 
Chairman automatically steps into the role by a constitutional mandate.
29.	 It is humbly submitted that a statute cannot be read in isolation to 
negate a clear constitutional authorization. In the present case, the 
trigger for invoking Article 91 was the resignation of the Hon’ble 
Chairman from the office of the Vice-President on 21 July 2025. Since 
then, by operation of law, the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha 
was empowered to perform all duties and exercise all the powers 
of the Chairman, including admitting/refusing to admit motions, as 
envisaged under Section 3(1). Therefore, the Deputy Chairman’s 
authority in this capacity flows directly from the Constitution, and 
any other interpretation would render Article 91, in the context of 
the Act, unworkable, redundant, and otiose.25
Result of the case: Writ petition dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey
25	
It is a settled position of law that no provision of the Constitution of India can be considered to be otiose. 
See Welfare Assn., A.R.P. v. Ranjit P. Gohil, (2003) 9 SCC 358 ¶28; Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. Union 
of India, (2008) 6 SCC 1 ¶126; Chief Justice of A.P. v. L.V.A. Dixitulu, (1979) 2 SCC 34 ¶74; Jindal 
Stainless Ltd. v. State of Haryana, (2017) 12 SCC 1 ¶13 & 15; Jayant Verma v. Union of India, (2018) 
4 SCC 743 ¶25; Rajendra Diwan v. Pradeep Kumar Ranibala, (2019) 20 SCC 143 ¶75.
