[2026] 2 S.C.R. 31 : 2026 INSC 16
Kadirkhan Ahmedkhan Pathan 
v.
The Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation & Ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 53 of 2026)
06 January 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari* and Vijay Bishnoi, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether in absence of any provision in the Maharashtra State 
Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Service Regulations, 1992 for 
institution of departmental proceedings against a superannuated 
employee, the Corporation could have proceeded against the 
appellant applying Rule 27(I)(2)(b)(i) of the Maharashtra Civil 
Services (Pension) Rules, 1982. In case enquiry is instituted after 
retirement of appellant, whether the Corporation had the jurisdiction 
to continue such enquiry and impose punishment, withholding the 
retiral benefits and direct recovery.
Headnotes†
Maharashtra Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1982 – r.27(I)(2)
(b)(i) – Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation (Staff) 
Service Regulations, 1992 – r.110 – The case of the appellant 
before High Court was that he had superannuated from the 
service as ‘Storage Superintendent’ on 31.08.2008, whereafter, 
he was served with a show-cause notice seeking explanation 
for unresolved railway transportation losses – He was held 
responsible for financial loss to the Corporation to the tune 
of Rs. 18,09,809/- – Writ petition before the High Court – The 
High Court vide impugned judgment refused to entertain the 
writ petition and disposed it off with directions to take recourse 
of appeal specified in the 1992 Regulations – Correctness:
Held: It is the specific case of the appellant that the Corporation 
lacks jurisdiction to institute the departmental proceedings against 
him in absence of any provision in 1992 Regulations – Per contra, 
the Corporation has tried to make out a case on the anvil of r.110 – 
It is pertinent to note that, in the present case, in furtherance to 
r.110 of 1992 Regulations, no board decision/order/notification 
* Author

32
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
adopting 1982 Pension Rules in toto for the employees of the 
Corporation has been brought on record – In the context of the 
provision of r.27, it cannot be made applicable ipso facto until the 
Board of Directors has taken a conscious decision specifying the 
circumstances and making similar benevolent provision as made 
in 1982 Pension Rules; or having sanction of the Government as 
required u/r.27(2) (b)(i) for instituting or continuing the proceedings 
in the contingency as specified applying the Regulations – The 
usage of the word ‘shall’ in r.27(2)(b)(i) implies that the requirement 
of sanction from the Government prior to institution of departmental 
enquiry is mandatory in nature for each case – Such mandate 
cannot be diluted or by-passed by the Corporation under the pretext 
of general sanction or general practice – Thus, the irresistible 
conclusion can be drawn that the Corporation had no jurisdiction 
to institute the departmental proceedings against the appellant for 
the alleged misconduct and to direct recovery against him applying 
1982 Pension Rules – The impugned departmental proceedings 
against the appellant is hereby quashed and the Corporation 
is directed to release all the retiral benefits to the appellant. 
[Paras 21, 27, 30, 31]
Case Law Cited
Bhagirathi Jena v. Board of Directors, O.S.F.C. and Others [1999] 
2 SCR 354 : (1999) 3 SCC 666 – relied on.
Girijan Cooperative Corporation Limited Andhra Pradesh v. 
K. Satyanarayana Rao (2010) 15 SCC 322; Anant R. Kulkarni v. 
Y.P. Education Society and Others [2013] 6 SCR 1124 : (2013) 6 
SCC 515 – referred to.
List of Acts
Maharashtra Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1982; Maharashtra 
State Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Service Regulations, 1992. 
List of Keywords
Service Law; Superannuation; Retiral benefits; Service Rules; 
Service Regulations; Losses; Railway transportation losses; 
Financial loss; Jurisdiction ; Departmental enquiry; Rule 
27(I)(2)(b)(i) of Maharashtra Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1982; 
Rule 110 Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation (Staff) 
Service Regulations, 1992.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
33
Kadirkhan Ahmedkhan Pathan v.  
The Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation & Ors.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 53 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.01.2021 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Bombay at Aurangabad in WP No. 10858 of 2018
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Anjani Kumar Jha, Varun V. Solshe, Vivek C. Solshe.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Yash Prashant Sonavane, Ravindra Keshavrao Adsure.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
J.K. Maheshwari J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Assailing the final judgment dated 25.01.2021 passed by the Division 
Bench of High Court of Judicature at Bombay Bench at Aurangabad 
(hereinafter referred to as “High Court”) in Writ Petition No. 10858 
of 2018, disposing-of the writ petition with directions to the appellant 
(retired employee) to prefer appeal against the order of disciplinary 
authority directing recovery, the instant appeal has been preferred.
3.	
The issue in the present lis revolves around the institution of the 
departmental enquiry by the respondent – Maharashtra State 
Warehousing Corporation (for brevity, ‘Corporation’) against the 
appellant after his superannuation in absence of any provision in 
the governing service rules and regulations, i.e., ‘Maharashtra Civil 
Services (Pension) Rules, 1982 (in short ‘1982 Pension Rules’)’ 
and ‘Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Service 
Regulations, 1992 (in short ‘1992 Regulations’)’.
4.	
The case of the appellant before High Court was that he had 
superannuated from the service as ‘Storage Superintendent’ on 
31.08.2008, whereafter, he was served with a show-cause notice 
seeking explanation for unresolved railway transportation losses. 
A charge-sheet was served to him, which was followed by the 

34
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
punishment order, whereby he was held responsible for financial 
loss to the Corporation to the tune of Rs. 18,09,809/-, directing 
recovery against him. Aggrieved, the appellant preferred writ petition 
inter-alia praying for quashing of show-cause notice as well as the 
action taken in furtherance thereto. The High Court vide impugned 
judgment refused to entertain the writ petition and disposed it off 
with directions to take recourse of appeal specified in the 1992 
Regulations. Hence, the present appeal. 
FACTS
5.	
Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts put in brief are that 
the appellant had joined the Corporation on 04.01.1969 and 
superannuated on 31.08.2008 as Storage Superintendent. After 
approximately 11 months, based on the allegations of storage loss 
and Railway Transit Loss (RTL) to tune of Rs. 22,22,561/- and Rs. 
15,20,666/- between March, 2006 to June, 2008 during his tenure as 
‘Centre Head’, a show-cause notice dated 18.08.2009 was served to 
the appellant, inter-alia alleging that on review, increase in storage 
loss was found from 1% to 5.75% and 6.87% and transportation loss 
was also much higher than reasonable and expected amounts. The 
appellant was asked to submit explanation within 10 days, failing 
which, departmental enquiry would be initiated. Having found the 
reply of the appellant unsatisfactory, the Corporation alleged that 
appellant had violated Regulation 741(5) and 742(13) of the 1992 
Regulations and served him charge-sheet dated 18.02.2010. 
6.	
Appellant vide letter 06.03.2010 submitted reply and denied the 
charges, however, he was asked to appear before the Enquiry 
Officer on 24.03.2011. The appellant appeared and prayed to 
supply the material documents, on which the next was scheduled 
on 12.05.2011. The appellant did not appear on the said date on the 
pretext of non-supply of the documents. The department continued the 
enquiry and served the second show-cause notice dated 09.11.2012, 
asking explanation as to why disciplinary action should not be taken 
against him on the findings of the charges which were found partially 
proved. Disputing the same, the appellant again submitted a reply, 
1	
Acts of misconduct – (5) Causing wilful damage to work in process or to any property of the Corporation. 
2	
(13) – Indiscipline or breach or flouting of any instructions or orders issued by the Corporation, from time 
to time regarding working, conduct etc. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
35
Kadirkhan Ahmedkhan Pathan v.  
The Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation & Ors.
however in vain. The Corporation vide order dated 10.12.2012 held 
him responsible for the losses to the tune of Rs. 18,09,809/- and 
consequently, withheld his retiral benefits of Rs. 4,43,013/-, inclusive 
of gratuity, provident fund and leave encashment. 
7.	
The appellant through RTI (right to information) found that the RTL was 
reduced to Rs. 2,46,461/-, however, on further contest, the appellant 
sought release of his retiral benefits. The Corporation served him with 
the third show-cause notice dated 20.10.2016 seeking explanation 
as to why he should not be held responsible for the loss caused 
to the Corporation to the tune of Rs. 3,70,820/- and why such be 
not recovered from him. Finally, the Corporation vide punishment 
order dated 04.03.2017 found the appellant guilty and responsible 
for the financial losses to the tune of Rs. 18,09,809/- and directed 
recovery. Out of said amount, the Corporation withheld the retiral 
benefits of the appellant of Rs. 4,43,013/-, and the remaining dues 
of Rs. 13,66,796/- were directed to be recovered. 
8.	
Aggrieved, the appellant preferred Writ Petition No. 10858 of 2018 
seeking following reliefs:-
“a. This Hon’ble Court be pleased to issue writ of mandamus 
or any other writ order or direction in the nature of writ of 
mandamus and be pleased to quash and set aside the 
enquiry and the action, if any, taken pursuant to the show 
cause notice dated 18.08.2009;
b. This Hon’ble Court be pleased to quash and set aside 
the communication dated 4th March, 2017 and further be 
pleased to direct the respondents to forthwith pay to the 
petitioner all the retiral benefits such as provident fund, 
gratuity, leave encashment, arrears of 6th Pay Commission 
etc. with interest till realization of the amount;
c. This Hon’ble Court be pleased to quash and set aside 
the impugned show cause notice dated 20.10.2016 issued 
by the General Manager (QC) of respondent no. 1;
d. Pending hearing and final disposal of this writ petition, 
the respondents be forthwith directed to pay this petitioner 
all the retiral benefits such as provident fund, gratuity, leave 
encashment etc. with interest till realization of the amount;
xx
xx
xx

36
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
9.	
In the backdrop of the facts, the appellant posed the issue of 
jurisdiction to institute the departmental proceedings against him 
after his superannuation by the Corporation in absence of having any 
provisions in the 1992 Regulations. It was said, he was neither placed 
under suspension, nor any enquiry was pending against at the time of 
superannuation. On the contrary, it was the case of the Corporation 
that in terms of Rule 1103 of the 1992 Regulations, in cases for which 
specific provision has not been made, the Corporation can proceed 
under Rule 274 of 1982 Pension Rules. By impugned judgment, the 
High Court accepted the contention of the Corporation and said 
that though there is no specific provision in the 1992 Regulations 
for institution of the departmental proceedings post superannuation, 
however, instituting proceedings against the retired employee, with 
the aid of Rule 27 of the 1982 Pension Rules can be done in terms 
of Rule 110 of 1992 Regulations. On the question of withholding 
the retiral benefits, since his service was not pensionable, it was 
concluded, as per Rule 9(37) of 1982 Pension Rules, ‘pension’ 
includes ‘gratuity’ and hence, the Corporation was entitled to withhold 
only gratuity and no other retiral benefits like provident fund, leave 
encashment and insurance. Lastly, considering the remedy of appeal 
in the 1992 Regulations, the High Court refrained to delve into the 
merit and disposed the writ petition granting liberty to the appellant to 
challenge the order of the disciplinary authority before the appellate 
authority. Hence, the present appeal. 
ARGUMENTS OF THE APPELLANT AND THE RESPONDENTS
10.	 Mr. Varun V. Solshe, learned counsel for the appellant submits 
that the Corporation at the very inception lacked the jurisdiction 
to institute the departmental proceedings. Rule 110 of the 1992 
Regulations deals the contingencies for which a specific provision in 
the Regulations has not been made. It is in the nature of residuary 
clause (or mere a referral clause), which equips the Corporation to 
regulate the matters as far as possible alike retired ‘employees’ of 
Government of Maharashtra. It does not confer jurisdiction to make 
out a new case for carrying out departmental enquiry against retired 
employees of the corporation.
3	
Application of Rules, Regulations, and Orders of the Government of Maharashtra. 
4	
Right of Government to withhold or withdraw pension. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
37
Kadirkhan Ahmedkhan Pathan v.  
The Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation & Ors.
11.	 It is further submitted that, the Rule 27 of the 1982 Pension Rules 
does not come to the aid, for the reason that as per clause (b), 
if departmental proceedings had not been instituted while the 
government servant was in service before his retirement, or during his 
re-employment, it could not have been instituted without the sanction 
of the Government, which was not secured at appropriate level. 
12.	 Per contra, Mr. Ravindra Keshavrao Adsure, learned counsel for 
the respondent, submitted that in compliance of the order passed 
by the High Court, an amount of Rs. 1,89,548/- qua other retiral 
benefits except gratuity was already returned to the appellant vide 
cheque dated 22.02.2021, which was accepted by the appellant. In 
this view, estoppel is operative against him to challenge the order 
of the High Court. 
13.	 On the issue of jurisdiction to institute the departmental enquiry, it is 
urged that such objection was never raised before the Corporation 
or at any stage of enquiry or proceedings. Further, Rule 110 of the 
1992 Regulations in specific terms stipulate, all matters for which 
no specific provision has been provided, they shall be regulated as 
far as possible in the same manner as in the case of the employees 
of the Government of Maharashtra. The 1982 Pension Rules are 
applicable to the employees of Government of Maharashtra and 
as per Rule 27, the Corporation has the right alike Government to 
withhold or withdraw the pension of an employee for the financial 
loss caused to the Corporation during his tenure.
14.	 Insofar as requirement of prior sanction of the State Government 
as contemplated under Rule 27(2)(b)(i) of 1982 Pension Rules for 
instituting departmental proceedings is concerned, it is said, 1992 
Regulations were drafted by the Corporation and sent to the State 
Government vide letter dated 04.03.1990 for approval. The State 
Government had granted approval to the same vide letter dated 
31.03.1990, whereafter the Regulations were published in the 
Maharashtra State Gazette Part-IVC dated 02.01.1992. Therefore, 
once the State Government had granted approval then it shall include 
sanction for exercising power under Rule 27 of the 1982 Pension Rules. 
APPRECIATION OF ARGUMENTS
15.	 Learned counsel for the parties are heard at length and records are 
perused. The question that falls for our consideration is ‘whether in 

38
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
absence of any provision in the 1992 Regulations for institution of 
departmental proceedings against a superannuated employee, the 
Corporation could have proceeded against the appellant applying 
Rule 27(I)(2)(b)(i) of the 1982 Pension Rules? In case enquiry is 
instituted after retirement of appellant, whether the Corporation had 
the jurisdiction to continue such enquiry and impose punishment, 
withholding the retiral benefits and direct recovery?’
16.	 Since both the questions are inter-linked, they are taken up together 
for discussion and answered simultaneously. Before adverting to 
the submissions of parties, it is necessary to refer the relevant 
Regulations, which are reproduced as thus:-
Rule 110 of 1992 Regulations – 
“Application of Rules, Regulations, and Orders of 
the Government of Maharashtra – All matters for 
which specific provisions have not been made in these 
Regulations shall, as far as possible and to such extent as 
may be considered as appropriate by the Corporation, be 
regulated in the same manner as in the case of employees 
of the Government of Maharashtra.”
A bare perusal of above, it reveals, in all such cases for which there 
is no specific provision contained in the Regulations, the Corporation 
as far as possible and to such an extent, as may be considered 
appropriate by it, regulate such cases in the same manner as in 
the case of employees of the Government of Maharashtra. In other 
words, it is in the nature of miscellaneous provision, incorporated 
in the Regulations with an intent to cover such cases on which the 
Regulations are silent. If Corporation considers it appropriate to adopt 
and to apply the Service Rules as applicable to the employees of 
Government of Maharashtra, they are at liberty to do so.
17.	 Rule 27 of the 1982 Pension Rules – 
27. Right of Government to withhold or withdraw 
pension 
(I) Government may, by order in writing, withhold or 
withdraw a pension or any part of it, whether permanently 
or for a specified period, and also order the recovery 
from such pension, the whole or part of any pecuniary 
loss caused to Government, if, in any departmental or 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
39
Kadirkhan Ahmedkhan Pathan v.  
The Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation & Ors.
judicial proceedings, the pensioner is found guilty of 
grave misconduct or negligence during the period of his 
service including service rendered upon re- employment 
after retirement: 
Provided that the Maharashtra Public Service Commission 
shall be consulted before any final orders are passed in 
respect of officers holding posts within their purview: 
Provided further that where a part of pension is withheld 
or withdrawn, the amount of remaining pension shall not 
be reduced below the minimum fixed by Government.
(2) (a) The departmental proceedings referred to in sub-rule 
(1), if instituted while the Government servant was in service 
whether before his retirement or during his re- employment, 
shall, after the final retirement of the Government servant, 
be deemed to be proceedings under this rule and shall be 
continued and concluded by the authority by which they 
were commenced in the same manner as if the Government 
servant had continued in service. 
(b) The departmental proceedings, if not instituted while 
the Government servant was in service, whether before 
his retirement or during his re-employment – 
(i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the 
Government, 
(ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place 
more than four years before such institution, and 
(iii) shall be conducted by such authority and at such place 
as the Government may direct and in accordance with the 
procedure applicable to the departmental proceedings in 
which an order of dismissal from service could be made 
in relation to the Government servant during his service.
(3) No judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the 
Government servant was in service, whether before his 
retirement or during his re-employment, shall be instituted 
in respect of a cause of action which arose or in respect 
of an event which took place, more than four years before 
such institution. 

40
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
(4) In the case of a Government servant who has retired 
on attaining the age of Superannuation or otherwise and 
against whom any departmental or judicial proceedings 
are instituted or where departmental proceedings are 
continued under sub-rule (2), a provisional pension as 
provided in rule 130 shall be sanctioned.
xx
xx
xx
On reading of the above, it is luculent that the Government has the 
right to withhold or withdraw the pension or any part thereof for a 
limited period or for the period as it deemed fit or recover the loss, if 
any, on account of grave misconduct or negligence of the pensioner 
during his employment or upon re-employment after retirement, after 
consultation with the Public Service Commission. While doing so, in 
case of withholding or withdrawing the pension, remaining pension 
shall not be reduced to the threshold fixed by the Government. 
18.	 In case the departmental proceedings have not been instituted while 
government servant was in service or before his retirement or during 
his re-employment, and the Government wishes to institute the 
proceedings, it may be instituted with the sanction of the Government. 
It is also made clear that the institution of any proceeding after 
retirement can be for a cause which took place within four years prior 
to the institution. Similarly, if the proceedings are already instituted, 
but have not culminated, they can be continued in the same pace and 
manner as specified in Rule 27(1). After institution of the proceedings, 
if the government servant attains the age of superannuation and the 
proceedings are continued under sub-rule (2), a provisional pension 
as provided in Rule 130 shall be sanctioned. 
19.	 On appreciation of Rule 27(b), it can safely be observed that in cases 
where the departmental proceedings were instituted post-retirement 
without obtaining sanction of the government till culmination as 
specified in the rules and simultaneously if the cause of action of 
such proceedings arose prior to four years of date of institution, such 
proceedings could not have been instituted or continued. Therefore, 
the provision is benevolent in nature, as it regulates the State’s 
discretion to institute or continue departmental proceedings.
20.	 As referred above, in particular Rule 110, which appears to be a 
miscellaneous provision and residuary in nature. The adoption of 1982 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
41
Kadirkhan Ahmedkhan Pathan v.  
The Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation & Ors.
Pension Rules in Rule 110 of 1992 Regulations is limited, when there 
is no specific provision and if the Corporation considers it appropriate 
to apply 1982 Pensions Rules, the same can be made applicable 
for the purpose of regulation of the employees of the Corporation 
alike the employees of the Government of Maharashtra. Therefore, 
1982 Pension Rules do not have ipso facto application until they 
have been either adopted or applied by a conscious decision taken 
at appropriate level. 
21.	 On appreciation of the facts of the present case, it is undisputed 
that the appellant stood retired on 31.08.2008. The first show cause 
notice dated 18.08.2009 was served on him approximately after 11 
months from the date of his superannuation asking explanation with 
respect to the financial losses occurred during his tenure as Centre 
Head. It is the specific case of the appellant that the Corporation 
lacks jurisdiction to institute the departmental proceedings against 
him in absence of any provision in 1992 Regulations. Per contra, the 
Corporation has tried to make out a case on the anvil of Rule 110, 
laying much emphasis on the fact that it empowers the Corporation 
to deal with the employees of the Corporation alike the cases of 
employees of Government of Maharashtra in absence of any specific 
provision. Therefore, the case of the appellant ought to be dealt 
under 1982 Pension Rules, and accordingly punishment order was 
passed against him, directing recovery. 
22.	 In such factual backdrop, when the matter posted for hearing on 
11.11.2025, certain queries cropped up and in the proceedings, a 
detailed order was passed, which is reproduced as thus:-
“1. During hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner 
referring to Clause 110 of the Maharashtra State 
Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Service Regulations (For 
short, the ‘Regulations’) contended that applicability of 
the Rules, Regulations and orders of the Government of 
Maharashtra is not ipso facto. The said fact finds support 
from the Maharashtra Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 
1982 (for short, the ‘Pension Rules’) which are made 
applicable against him in particular clause 27(I)(2)(b)(i) of 
the Pension Rules. It is further contended by him that by 
way of implication of Rules 27(4), those Rules would be 
applicable to those employees who are getting pension. 

42
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
In such circumstances, the interpretation as made by the 
High Court is not justified. 
2. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent referring 
to the findings as recorded by the High Court submits that 
the Pension Rules have rightly been made applicable in 
the facts of the case. 
3. After hearing for some time, it is put forth to the respondent 
that in furtherance to Clause 110 of the Regulations, any 
decision has been taken by the Corporation indicating 
the applicability of the Pension Rules and, in particular, 
to initiate and continue the departmental enquiry which 
was not absolute under the Pension Rules and is subject 
to approval by the Government. 
4. Learned counsel for the respondent prays for and is 
granted a week’s time to ascertain the said fact and to 
revert on the same. 
5. List on 18.11.2025 immediately after the fresh 
miscellaneous matters.”
23.	 In reply, the Corporation filed additional affidavit dated 15.11.2025, 
stating as thus:-
“7. With regard to two queries specifically raised by this 
Hon’ble Court at the time of hearing on 11.11.2025, I submit 
on the basis of record available with MSWC as under:-
a. Regulation 110 of Maharashtra State Warehousing 
Corporation (Staff) Service Regulations, 1992 contemplates 
that all matters, for which specific provisions have not 
been made under those Regulations of 1992, shall as far 
as possible and to such an extent as may be considered 
appropriate by the Corporation, be regulated in the same 
manner as in the case of employees of Government of 
Maharashtra by various Rules, Regulations, Orders of 
Government of Maharashtra. 
Perusal of MSWC’s record so far, though show that there 
is no specific order, circular, either at the instance of MD 
and/or Board of Directors of MSWC for adoption and 
applicability of Rule 27 of MCS (Pension) Rules, 1982, 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
43
Kadirkhan Ahmedkhan Pathan v.  
The Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation & Ors.
but with utmost respect and accountability, it is submitted 
that wording in Regulation 110 does not contemplate any 
specific Order/Circular for adoption and applicability of Rule 
27 of MCS (Pension) Rules, 1982. But admittedly, MSWC 
all along has been consistently resorting to, applying and 
adopting Rule 27 of MCS (Pension) Rules, 1982 while 
taking action against delinquent employee who has retired. 
xx
xx
xx
b. Further, with regard to issue of sanction of the State 
Government before instituting enquiry as contemplated 
under Rule 27(2)(b)(i) of MCS (Pension) Rules, 1982, it 
is submitted that 
(i) Regulations were drafted by MSWC and vide letter 
dated 04.03.1990 sent to State Government for approval. 
(ii) State Government (Cooperation & Textile Department) 
vide letter dated 31.03.1990 granted approval.
(iii) Thereafter in Maharashtra Government Gazette Part 
IVC (Page 29) dated 02.01.1992, those Regulations were 
published.
(iv) Then, Jt. MD vide Circular dated 10.07.1992 circulated 
those Regulations for the knowledge of all the Officers 
and Officers of MSWC. 
(v) Thus, admittedly these Regulations came into force 
w.e.f. 02.01.1992 i.e., the date of publication in Government 
Gazette.
Thus, once State Government has granted approval on 
31.03.1990 to entire Regulations; inclusive of Regulation 
110 then, it clearly means that for exercising power 
under Rule 27(2)(b) of MCS (Pension) Rules, 1982, 
State Government has already granted general sanction 
on 31.03.1990 itself and more particularly when those 
Regulations were published in Maharashtra Government 
Gazette on 02.01.1992.
xx
xx
xx

44
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
24.	 The perusal of the averments of additional affidavit, two things 
are patently clear; first, that no resolution or order was passed 
by the Corporation adopting or applying the 1982 Pension Rules 
to the employees of the Corporation and the entire exercise was 
being carried out based on general practice; second, even if it is 
assumed that Rule 27(2)(b) was applicable in the case of appellant, 
no document has been brought on record to show that mandate of 
sanction as provided in the said sub rule was complied with. 
25.	 In reference to the above fact guidance can be taken from a judgment 
of ‘Girijan Cooperative Corporation Limited Andhra Pradesh Vs. 
K. Satyanarayana Rao’5, wherein the issue arose regarding a case 
of alleged financial irregularities with respect to year 1992-93, for 
which disciplinary proceeding were initiated against the delinquent 
employees in year 1999, i.e., one year prior to their retirement in 
year 2000. The proceedings were continued after the retirement 
based on the circular dated 29.08.1998, whereby the Cooperative 
Corporation in its Board’s resolution for adoption of the ‘Andhra 
Pradesh Civil Service Rules’ and ‘Andhra Pradesh Fundamental 
Rules’ to its employees whenever the GCC service rules of employees 
are silent, conferred power to the MD to adopt the same. This Court 
while interpreting the circular, opined that indeed MD had the power 
to adopt, but no such adoption had been brought to the notice of the 
Court, therefore, continuance of the enquiry/departmental proceedings 
were not found to be valid. 
26.	 It is pertinent to note that, in the present case, in furtherance to 
Rule 110 of 1992 Regulations, no board decision/order/notification 
adopting 1982 Pension Rules in toto for the employees of the 
Corporation has been brought on record. Rule 110 is general in 
nature and where specific provisions have not been made in the 
said Regulations, then in the contingency, as far as possible and to 
such extent as may be considered appropriate by Corporation, the 
cases may be regulated in the manner as in the case of government 
employees. In the context of the provision of Rule 27, as discussed, 
it cannot be made applicable ipso facto until the Board of Directors 
has taken a conscious decision specifying the circumstances and 
making similar benevolent provision as made in 1982 Pension Rules; 
5	
(2010) 15 SCC 322

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
45
Kadirkhan Ahmedkhan Pathan v.  
The Maharashtra State Warehousing Corporation & Ors.
or having sanction of the Government as required under Rule 27(2)
(b)(i) for instituting or continuing the proceedings in the contingency 
as specified applying the Regulations. 
27.	 Further, the clarification given by the Corporation in its additional 
affidavit regarding sanction that once the 1992 Regulations 
were granted approval by the State Government vide letter 
dated 31.03.1990, ‘general sanction’ was accorded for instituting 
departmental proceedings under Rule 27(2)(b)(i) of the 1982 Pension 
Rules, is devoid of any discernable logic. The usage of the word 
‘shall’ in Rule 27(2)(b)(i) implies that the requirement of sanction 
from the Government prior to institution of departmental enquiry is 
mandatory in nature for each case. Such mandatory safeguard is 
intended to prevent institution of unwarranted proceedings against 
the superannuated employees. Therefore, such mandate cannot be 
diluted or by-passed by the Corporation under the pretext of general 
sanction or general practice, hence, stand as taken and the argument 
put forth by respondents are repelled. 
28.	 At this juncture, it is apposite to refer the judgment in ‘Bhagirathi 
Jena Vs. Board of Directors, O.S.F.C. and Others’6, wherein this 
Court while dealing the issue of initiation of departmental enquiry, in 
absence of specific provision and its continuance after retirement, 
had observed as thus:-
“7. In view of the absence of such a provision in the 
abovesaid regulations, it must be held that the Corporation 
had no legal authority to make any reduction in the retiral 
benefits of the appellant. There is also no provision for 
conducting a disciplinary enquiry after retirement of the 
appellant and nor any provision stating that in case 
misconduct is established, a deduction could be made 
from retiral benefits. Once the appellant had retired from 
service on 30-6-1995, there was no authority vested in 
the Corporation for continuing the departmental enquiry 
even for the purpose of imposing any reduction in the 
retiral benefits payable to the appellant. In the absence 
of such an authority, it must be held that the enquiry had 
lapsed and the appellant was entitled to full retiral benefits 
on retirement.”
6	
(1999) 3 SCC 666

46
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
29.	 In ‘Anant R. Kulkarni Vs. Y.P. Education Society and Others’7, 
this Court inter-alia dealing with a similar question as to under what 
circumstances enquiry can be conducted against the delinquent 
employee who has retired on reaching the age of superannuation, 
observed as thus:-
30.	 After analyzing Rule 110 of 1992 Regulations and Rule 27 of 1982 
Pension Rules and also considering the averments made in additional 
affidavit filed as directed on 11.11.2025, the Corporation was unable 
to produce a conscious decision of the Board regarding adoption of 
Pension Rules and the circumstances explaining the situation to apply 
the same rules as applicable to the employees of the Government 
of Maharashtra to the employees of the Corporation in the matter 
of institution and continuance of the disciplinary proceedings post 
retirement. In light of the above discussions and in view of the 
judgments referred hereinabove, the irresistible conclusion can 
be drawn that the Corporation had no jurisdiction to institute the 
departmental proceedings against the appellant for the alleged 
misconduct and to direct recovery against him applying 1982 Pension 
Rules. As such the questions as posed hereinabove are answered 
in favour of the appellant against the Corporation. 
31.	 Accordingly, the present appeal is allowed and the impugned order 
passed by the High Court is set-aside. The impugned departmental 
proceedings against the appellant are also hereby quashed, and 
the Corporation is directed to release all the retiral benefits to the 
appellant within a period of eight weeks. The recovery, if any, made 
from the appellant in the interregnum, shall also be refunded within 
the period as specified. 
32.	 Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed-of. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
7	
(2013) 6 SCC 515
