[2026] 2 S.C.R. 295 : 2026 INSC 112
C. Velusamy
v.
K Indhera
(Civil Appeal No. 696 of 2026)
03 February 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and 
Atul S. Chandurkar, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether a Court can entertain an application u/s.29A(5) of the 
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 to extend the mandate of 
the arbitrator(s) for making the award even after an ‘award’ is 
rendered, though after the expiry of the statutory limit of eighteen-
month period.
Headnotes†
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.29A, 29A(5) – 
Disputes between the parties, sole arbitrator appointed  – 
Pleadings were completed on 20.08.2022 which was the 
commencement of the period of twelve months provided 
u/s.29A(1) for making the Award – Before the conclusion 
of twelve months, parties filed a joint memo u/s.29A(3) and 
extended the mandate of the arbitrator by a further period 
of six months, ending on 20.02.2024 – Matter was reserved 
for final award on 09.09.2023 – Arbitrator finally passed the 
award on 11.05.2024 – In the meantime, the mandate of the 
arbitrator had terminated on 20.02.2024 – Respondent filed 
application u/s.34 for setting aside the award on the ground 
that the mandate of the arbitral tribunal expired and arbitral 
proceedings stood terminated before passing of the award – 
Appellant filed application u/s.29A seeking extension of the 
mandate of the tribunal – High Court dismissed the application 
u/s.29A as not maintainable whereas, s.34 petition filed by the 
respondent was allowed – Challenge to:
Held: Provisions of the Act, particularly s.29A, must not be 
interpreted to infer a threshold bar for an application u/s.29A(5) for 
extension of the mandate of the arbitrator even when an award is 
passed, though after the expiry of the mandate – Court can entertain 
an application u/s.29A(5) and pass appropriate orders u/s.29A(4) 

296
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
for extension of the mandate of the arbitrator even after the award 
is rendered in the meanwhile – Thus, an application u/s.29A(5) for 
extension of the mandate of the arbitrator is maintainable even after 
the expiry of the time u/ss.29A(1) and (3) and even after rendering 
of an award during that time – Such an award is ineffective and 
unenforceable – But the power of the court to consider extension 
is not impaired by such an indiscretion of the arbitrator – While 
considering the application, the Court will examine if there is 
sufficient cause for extending the mandate, and in the process, it 
may impose such terms and conditions as the situation demands – 
It will also take into account other factors such as reduction of the 
fee of the arbitrator under proviso to s.29A(4) and also impose 
costs on parties if the fact situation so demands – Substitution is 
an option for the Court as the provision itself says, “it shall be open 
for the Court to substitute”, and it will be exercised carefully – If 
the mandate is extended, the arbitral tribunal will pick up from 
where it was left, and seamlessly continue the proceeding from 
the stage at which the mandate had expired, and conclude within 
the time granted – Appeal against the judgment in Application No. 
5993 of 2024 passed by the High Court is allowed – Application is 
restored to its original number – High Court will proceed with the 
said application and dispose it of as per the principles laid down 
in the present judgment. [Paras 2, 20, 21, 23, 24]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.29A – Interpretation:
Held: Sub-section (1) of s.29A mandates that the award shall be 
made within 12 months of the completion of pleadings before the 
Arbitral Tribunal – While sub-section (2) incentivises expeditious 
making of the Award, proviso to sub-section (4) and sub-section 
(8) authorises the Court to impose penalty for delay in making the 
award – Sub-section (3) enables parties, by consent, to extend 
the period of 12 months for making the award by a further period 
not exceeding 6 months – If the award is not made within the 
stipulated period of 12 months or the extended period of 6 months, 
the mandate of the arbitrator(s) shall terminate – This termination 
is subject to the power of the Court to extend the period – The 
‘Court’ u/s.29A shall be the Civil Court of ordinary original jurisdiction 
in a district and includes the High Court in exercise of its original 
civil jurisdiction u/s.2(1)(e), and shall not be the High Court or the 
Supreme Court u/s.11(6) of the Act – s.42 of the Act relating to 
jurisdiction for applications will also not apply to s.11 of the Act – 
There is no statutory prescribed time limit for the Court to exercise 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
297
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
the power u/s.29A(4) for extending the period, except for its own 
discretion – Court can exercise the power before or after the 
expiry of the period u/sub-sections 29A(1) or (3) – Further, there 
is no prescription of an outer limit for extending the time for the 
conclusion of arbitral proceedings – Given this power, the Court 
will exercise it with circumspection, balancing the remedy with the 
rights of other stakeholders – The power of the Court to extend the 
time u/sub-section (4) may be exercised on an application by any 
of the parties – Once such an application for extension of time is 
pending, the mandate of the arbitrator shall continue till the disposal 
of such application u/sub-section (9) – The Court shall endeavour 
to dispose of such an application within 60 days – Delay in the 
delivery of an arbitral award, by itself, is not sufficient to set aside 
that award – It is only when the effect of the undue delay in the 
delivery of an arbitral award is explicit and adversely reflects on the 
findings therein, such delay and, more so, if it remains unexplained, 
can be construed to result in the award being in conflict with the 
public policy of India – Under s.29A(6), while exercising the power 
of extension, it shall be open to the Court to substitute one or 
all the arbitrators – This is a discretionary power that the Court 
would exercise in the facts and circumstances of the case – Upon 
substitution, the reconstituted tribunal shall be deemed to be in 
continuation of the previously appointed tribunal as per s.29A(7) 
and shall continue from the stage already reached and on the basis 
of evidence already on record – The newly appointed arbitrators 
shall be deemed to have received the evidence and materials – 
Vesting of the power of substitution, u/s.29A(6), is on the “Court” 
and this Court is the “Court” as defined in s.2(1)(e) – The text, as 
well as the context for identifying the Court in s.29A(6), as well 
as in s.29A(4), is the Court in s.2(1)(e) – The expression ‘Court’ 
in other provisions must be guided by the meaning given in s.2(1)
(e). [Paras 13 I-X]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Arbitration Act, 
1940 – Timelines for commencement, conduct, conclusion 
and termination of arbitral proceedings under both the 
Acts – Need for the prescription of timelines for making the 
award; recommendation of the law commission – International 
perspective on the validity of the arbitral award rendered after 
the stipulated statutory time limit – Discussed. [Paras 7-10]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.29A, (4), (6) – “if an 
award is not made”:

298
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Held: s.29A does not, in terms, bar an application for extension 
of the mandate of an arbitrator in the event of the delivery of an 
award – There is no such prescription anywhere in the section – In 
the first place, if an award is made after expiry of the mandate, then 
there is no doubt about the fact that such an award is non est – A 
better expression would be to hold that such an award would be 
unenforceable u/s.36 – Such an award need not be challenged 
u/s.34 – A unilateral act or the indiscretion of the arbitrator in making 
such an award will have no bearing on the power and jurisdiction 
vested in the Court u/s.29A – It cannot be that the Parliament has 
never intended that the act of an arbitrator in delivering an award 
when the mandate had expired would denude the power and 
jurisdiction vested in the Court – This power and jurisdiction stand 
on its own footing and is uninfluenced by the act of the arbitrator in 
passing an award without mandate – Further, the expression, “if an 
award is not made” in sub-section (4) is employed in the context of 
enabling the Court to extend the mandate of the arbitrator – The 
context in which the phrase is used makes it clear that the sub-
section is not addressing a situation where an arbitral award has 
been rendered after the mandate of the arbitrator has expired, but 
rather to declare that the Court can extend the period before or 
after the expiry of the mandate – ss.29A(4), (6) make it evident 
that the intention of the Parliament is to safeguard the conduct 
and conclusion of arbitral proceedings. [Paras 15, 16, 18]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – ss.29A(4), 29A(5), 
29A (6), 29A(8) – Empowerments thereunder, in the nature of 
instruments in s.29A, enable the courts to deploy them as and 
when the factual matrix demands – Stated. [Para 20]
Interpretation of Statutes – Statute providing legal remedies 
for the resolution of disputes – Duty of constitutional court:
Held: While interpreting an enactment providing legal remedies for 
the resolution of disputes, a constitutional court has the obligation 
to ensure that the provision is: (a) accessible, (b) affordable, (c) 
expeditious and (d) cohesive – Accessibility requires the remedy 
to be easily available – Affordability is an aspect that is related to 
the cost of availing the remedy, it must be at a reasonable price – 
Expeditious nature of a remedy is concerned with the quick disposal 
and abhors unreasonable delays – Yet another facet of effective 
remedy is in its cohesiveness. [Para 22]

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
299
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
Case Law Cited
Rohan Builders (India) Pvt. Ltd. v. Berger Paints India Ltd. [2024] 
9 SCR 473 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2494; Ajay Protech Private 
Limited v. General Manager and Anr. [2024] 11 SCR 850 : 2024 
SCC OnLine SC 3381; Lancor Holdings Ltd v. Prem Kumar Menon 
& Ors., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2319; Jagdeep Chowgule v. Sheela 
Chowgule, 2026 INSC 92 – relied on.
Mohan Lal Fatehpuria v. M/s Bharat Textiles & Ors., 2025 INSC 1409 : 
[2025] 12 SCR 408; NBCC (India) Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, 2025 
INSC 54 : [2025] 1 SCR 610; State of West Bengal v. Associated 
Contractors [2014] 10 SCR 426 : (2015) 1 SCC 32 – referred to. 
Suryadev Alloys & Power Private Ltd. v. Sh. Govindaraja Textiles Pvt. 
Ltd., 2020 SCC OnLine Mad 7858; Ayyasamy v. A. Shanmugavel, 
2024 SCC OnLine Mad 4338; RKEC Projects Limited v. Cochin 
Port Trust, 2024 SCC OnLine Ker 4192 – referred to. 
Oakland Metal Co Ltd. v. D. Benaim & Co. Ld. [1953] 2 QB 261; 
Alphamix Ltd v District Council of Rivière du Rempart (Mauritius) 
[2023] UKPC 20, at para 26; Ting Kang Chung John v. Teo 
Hee Lai Building Constructions Pte Ltd. [2010] SGHC 20, at 
para 41  – referred to.
Books and Periodicals Cited
‘Part II: The Process of an Arbitration, Chapter 6: Establishing the 
Procedural Framework’, in Jeffrey Maurice Waincymer, Procedure 
and Evidence in International Arbitration (2012), p. 418; ‘9. Award’, 
in Nigel Blackaby, Constantine Partasides, et al., Redfern and 
Hunter on International Arbitration (Seventh Edition) (2023), at 
para.9.169; Fadri Lenggenhager, ‘Chapter 17, Part II: Commentary 
on the ICC Rules, Article 31 [Time limit for the final award]’, in 
Manuel Arroyo (ed), Arbitration in Switzerland: The Practitioner’s 
Guide (Second Edition) (2018). pp. 2447; The Law Commission’s 
176th Report @ 2.21.5.
List of Acts
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Arbitration Act, 1940.
List of Keywords
Section 29A(5) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; 
Application under Section 29A(5) of the Arbitration and Conciliation 

300
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Act, 1996; Extension of mandate of the arbitrator(s) for making the 
award even after an ‘award’ is rendered, though after the expiry 
of the statutory limit of eighteen-month period; Extension of the 
mandate of arbitrator even after award is rendered in the meanwhile; 
Application u/s.29A(5) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
for extension of the mandate of the arbitrator is maintainable 
even after the expiry of the time u/ss.29A(1) and (3) and even 
after rendering of an award during that time; Sufficient cause 
for extending the mandate; Section 29A(4) of the Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996; Section 29A(6) of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 696 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.01.2025 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in AN No. 5993 of 2024
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Mrs. V Mohana, Sr. Adv., B Ragunath, Pranav V Shankar, Mrs. N 
C Kavitha, Mrs. Nimisha Thomas, Vijay Kumar, Ms. Runjhun Garg.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
M. Vijayan, M. Harish Kumar, P. S. Sudheer, Rishi Maheshwari, 
Ms. Anne Mathew, Bharat Sood, Jai Govind M J, Jashan Vir Singh.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Contents*
I. Question of Law .....................................................................
2
II. Facts ......................................................................................
3
III. Judgment of High Court .......................................................
5
IV. Submission ...........................................................................
6
V. Timelines for commencement, conduct, conclusion and 
termination of arbitral proceedings ............................................
7
* Ed. Note: Pagination as per the original Judgment.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
301
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
VI. Timelines under the 1940 Act ..............................................
8
VII. Timelines under the 1996 Act .............................................
9
VIII. The felt need for the prescription of timelines for making 
the award and the recommendation of the law commission .... 10
IX. Introduction of Section 29A & its interpretation: .................. 12
X. International perspective on the validity of the arbitral 
award rendered after the stipulated statutory time limit. ........... 14
XI. Conclusions .......................................................................... 18
1.	
Leave granted.
I.	
Question of Law
The following question of law has arisen for our consideration.
Whether a Court can entertain an application under Section 29A(5) 
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 to extend the mandate 
of the arbitrator(s) for making the award even after an ‘award’ is 
rendered, though after the expiry of the statutory limit of eighteen-
month period? 
2.	
We have considered the text as well as the context in which Parliament 
introduced Section 29A to the Act, empowering the Court to extend 
the mandate of the arbitrator. The power and the jurisdiction of the 
Court are not impaired by the indiscretion of the arbitrator in rendering 
an ‘award’ without a mandate, particularly when such an award does 
not partake the character of a decree and is unenforceable under 
Section 36. We have also explained the important role that the Court 
plays while balancing the twin interests - of securing the remedy of 
resolution of disputes through arbitration and ensuring integrity in 
its conduct. Though, the questions that we are required to consider 
had not arisen for consideration in Rohan Builders (India) Pvt. Ltd. v. 
Berger Paints India Ltd.1, we approve the observations made therein 
that the Court can entertain an application under Section 29A(5) 
1	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 2494.

302
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and pass appropriate orders under Section 29A(4) for extension of 
the mandate of the arbitrator even after the award is rendered in 
the meanwhile. 
II.	
Facts
3.	
The contractual relationship between the appellant and the respondent 
is governed by three agreements to sell2. As disputes arose, the 
appellant filed an application under Section 11 of the Act and the High 
Court, by its order dated 19.04.2022,3 appointed a sole arbitrator. 
The arbitrator issued notice on 04.05.2022 and convened the first 
meeting on 28.05.2022, and the pleadings were completed on 
20.08.2022, which date marked the commencement of the period 
of twelve months provided under Section 29A(1) of the 1996 Act 
for the making the Award. Before the conclusion of twelve months, 
parties filed a joint memo under Section 29A(3) and extended the 
mandate of the arbitrator by a further period of six months, ending 
on 20.02.2024. Arguments concluded, and the matter was reserved 
for final award on 09.09.2023. 
3.1	 Events that unfolded thereafter are indicative of myriad instances 
when real life fails to keep pace with human discipline for 
timelines. Despite the award being indicated to be almost 
ready, the proceedings were reopened on the representation 
of the parties. On the basis of emails from the respondent that 
settlement discussions are ongoing and are expected to be 
finalised by 15.11.2023, the matter was adjourned to 07.01.2024 
and thereafter to 27.01.2024. However, when it was reported that 
the discussions did not fructify into a settlement, the arbitrator 
reserved the matter for award on 30.01.2024. Notwithstanding 
the reservation, discussions continued until March 2024, when 
a tripartite agreement was entered into between the appellant, 
the respondent, and a third party, M/s G Square Realtors Private 
Limited, which agreement was, however, not placed before 
the arbitrator. We are informed that the matter was adjourned 
to 27.04.2024 and thereafter to 04.05.2024, and the arbitrator 
finally passed the award on 11.05.2024, which was later stamped 
and issued to the parties on 25.06.2024. In the meantime, as 
2	
Agreements to sell dated 19.12.2015, 31.07.2018 and 24.03.2021.
3	
Order dated 19.04.2022 in Arb.O.P.(Com.Div) No.2 of 2022.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
303
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
indicated earlier, the mandate of the arbitrator had terminated 
on 20.02.2024.
3.2	 Aggrieved by the award dated 11.05.2024, the respondent filed 
an application under Section 34 of the 1996 Act for setting aside 
the award on the ground that the mandate of the arbitral tribunal 
expired and arbitral proceedings stood terminated before passing 
of the award. On the other hand, on 12.11.2024, the appellant 
filed an application under Section 29A of the Act seeking an 
extension of the mandate of the tribunal.
4.	
The High Court, by order dated 24.01.2025, impugned before us 
dismissed the application under Section 29A as not maintainable. 
On the other hand, the Section 34 petition filed by the respondent 
was allowed by the High Court on 14.02.2025, relying on the order 
dated 24.01.2025. 
III.	
Judgment of High Court
5.	
Rejecting reliance of respondent on the judgment of this Court in 
Rohan Builders (Supra), the High Court held that the said precedent 
only settles the issue about the timing of an application for extension 
of time and holds that it can be made even after the expiry of the 
initial twelve months or the extended six months period. The High 
Court felt that the Supreme Court was neither dealing with a situation 
where the award had already been passed, nor has laid down any 
principle permitting extension of the mandate after making of the 
award.
5.1	 The High Court also distinguished the judgment of this Court 
in Ajay Protech Private Limited v. General Manager and Anr.4 
by holding that, in that case award had not been passed, and 
the Court was only concerned with sufficient cause for the 
extension of time.
5.2	 The High Court followed the decision rendered by the coordinate 
bench in Suryadev Alloys & Power Private Ltd. v. Sh. Govindaraja 
Textiles Pvt. Ltd.5 which held that under the 1996 Act, unlike 
the Arbitration Act, 1940, there is no provision empowering 
4	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3381.
5	
2020 SCC OnLine Mad 7858.

304
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the Court to enlarge time after the award is made, and that an 
award passed after expiry of the arbitrator’s mandate is a nullity. 
Apart from the decision of the coordinate bench in Suryadev 
Alloys (supra), the High Court also referred to and relied on 
the decision in Ayyasamy v. A. Shanmugavel6, which held that 
the Court cannot exercise power to extend the mandate after 
the award is delivered.
5.3	 Referring to the decision of the Kerala High Court in RKEC 
Projects Limited v. Cochin Port Trust7, which had taken the 
view that extension can be granted even after the award was 
passed, the High Court, without much discussion, held that it 
does not lay down correct law, as it reads into Section 29A a 
power which the provision does not confer.
5.4	 In conclusion, the High Court held that if an award is passed 
subsequent to the expiry of the mandate of the arbitrator, it is 
a nullity and the application for extension of the mandate of 
the arbitrator is not maintainable.
IV.	
Submission 
6.	
Appearing for appellant, Mrs. V Mohana, learned senior counsel 
relied on the decision in Rohan Builders (supra), to contend that an 
application under Section 29A is maintainable even after expiry of 
the prescribed period of 12 months or the extended 6 months, as 
the Court has power to extend the mandate either before or after 
expiry of the period under Sections 29A(1) and 29A(3). On the other 
hand, Mr. M. Vijayan, learned counsel assisted by Mr. P.S. Sudheer, 
AOR distinguished Rohan Builders (supra) and relied on the decision 
of the Madras High Court in Suryadev Alloys (supra) to argue that 
time cannot be extended after passing of the award as the 1996 Act 
contains no provision allowing post-award extension. 
V.	
Timelines for commencement, conduct, conclusion and 
termination of arbitral proceedings 
7.	
Access to justice constitutes the very foundation of democratic 
governance, serving as the linchpin of a fair and equitable society. 
6	
2024 SCC OnLine Mad 4338.
7	
2024 SCC OnLine Ker 4192.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
305
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
Our Constitution, in its wisdom, establishes a comprehensive 
judicial architecture, encompassing the Supreme Court, the High 
Courts, and District Courts for public and ordinary civil/criminal 
remedies to safeguard this inalienable right. It is imperative that 
these judicial remedies are effective. In fact, the effectiveness of 
judicial remedies is a constitutional mission, and it is always a work 
in progress for the Supreme Court to ensure that the remedies are 
impartial, readily accessible, financially viable, swiftly administered, 
and comprehensively tailored. Beyond the realm of public law and 
ordinary civil/criminal remedies, as indicated hereinabove, parties 
to a dispute may elect to resolve their differences through mutually 
agreed procedures, crystallised in the form of contractual agreements. 
It is permissible in law to have such alternative dispute resolution 
mechanisms through contract. Section 28 of the Contract Act protects 
these alternative dispute resolution agreements through arbitration 
between contesting parties, fostering an environment conducive to 
expeditious and amicable dispute resolution.
7.1	 The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 provides a simple, 
efficient, cost-effective, confidential, and fair dispute resolution 
remedy by empowering the parties to choose their arbitrators and 
also the procedure for the conduct of the arbitral proceedings.
7.2	 Efficiency in the conduct of arbitral proceedings is integral to 
the effectiveness of the dispute resolution remedy through 
arbitration. Efficiency is inextricably connected with the 
expeditious conclusion of arbitral proceedings. While the statute 
incorporates party autonomy even with respect to the conduct 
and conclusion of arbitral proceedings, there is a statutory 
recognition of the power of the Court to step in wherever it 
is necessary to ensure that the process of resolution of the 
dispute is taken to its logical end, if, according to the Court, 
the circumstances so warrant.
VI.	 Timelines under the 1940 Act 
8.	
Under the Arbitration Act, 1940, the First Schedule prescribed that 
an arbitral award shall be made within four months from the date 
of reference or from the date on which the arbitrator was called 
upon to act by notice, subject to any extension granted thereafter. 
Section 28 of the 1940 Act empowered the Court to enlarge the time 

306
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
for making the award, regardless of whether the prescribed period 
for making the award had expired or not or whether the award had 
already been made or not. Section 28 of the Arbitration Act, 1940, 
is extracted below for ready reference 
“Section 28- Power to Court only to enlarge time for 
making award. 
(1) The Court may, if it thinks fit, whether the time for 
making the award has expired or not and whether the 
award has been made or not, enlarge from time to time 
for making the award.
(2) Any provision in an arbitration agreement whereby the 
arbitrators or umpire may, except with the consent of all 
the parties to the agreement, enlarge the time for making 
the award, shall be void and of no effect.”
(emphasis supplied)
VII.	 Timelines under the 1996 Act 
9.	
Party autonomy, coupled with minimal intervention of judicial 
authorities, has been the guiding principle for the 1996 Act. This 
is perhaps the reason for not provisioning a statutory timeline for 
delivering awards and prescribing consequences of not delivering 
them on time.
9.1	 In the event of failure of an arbitrator to act without undue 
delay, recourse was provided under Section 14 of the Act of 
1996 to dual remedies-by approaching the arbitrator first and 
then the Court8. Section 14(1)(a) states that the mandate of 
an arbitrator would stand terminated if he either becomes de 
jure or de facto unable to perform his functions or, for other 
reasons, fails to act without undue delay. Section 14(2) states 
that, if a controversy remains concerning any of the grounds 
referred to in Section 14(1)(a), a party may, unless otherwise 
agreed with by the parties, apply to the Court to decide on the 
termination of the arbitrator’s mandate.
8	
Lancor Holdings Ltd v. Prem Kumar Menon & Ors., 2025 SCC OnLine SC 2319.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
307
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
On the other hand, Section 34 of the 1996 Act does not postulate 
delay in the delivery of the arbitral award as a ground in itself, to set 
it aside, except, as explained in the Lancor Holdings (supra), where 
the negative effect of the delay in the arbitral award is explicit and 
adversely reflects on the findings of the award.
VIII.	 The felt need for the prescription of timelines for making 
the award and the recommendation of the law commission
10.	 The absence of a statutory time limit under the Act of 1996 had 
resulted in arbitrations remaining pending for several years, even 
without Court intervention, thereby defeating the very object of 
arbitration as a speedy dispute resolution mechanism. Accordingly, 
the Law Commission proposed the introduction of a structured 
timeline, with limited extensions by party consent and supervisory 
control by the Court thereafter, not with a view to terminating arbitral 
proceedings, but to compel their timely progress. The emphasis 
was on continuation of the arbitration, even pending applications for 
extension, so that procedural delays do not result in wastage of time, 
costs, or evidence already led. The legislative intent, therefore, was 
to ensure that an arbitral award is ultimately passed, with judicial 
intervention operating as a facilitative and corrective mechanism to 
curb delay, rather than as a means to abort the arbitral process. 
The relevant extract from the 176th Report of the Law Commission 
of India is extracted below:
“2.21.1 (…)But the omission of the provision for extension of 
time and therefore the absence of any time limit has given 
rise to another problem, namely, that awards are getting 
delayed before the arbitral tribunal even under the 1996 
Act. One view is that this is on account of the absence of 
a provision as to time limit for passing an award.
xx xx xx
2.21.3 (…)The time limit can be more realistic subject to 
extension only by the court. Delays ranging from five years 
to even fourteen years in a single arbitration have come 
to the Commission’s notice. The Supreme Court of India 
has also referred to these delays of the arbitral tribunal. 
The point here is that these delays are occurring even 
in cases where there is no court intervention during the 

308
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
arbitral process. The removal of the time limit is having 
its own adverse consequences. There can be a provision 
for early disposal of the applications for extension, if that 
is one of the reasons for omitting a provision prescribing 
a time limit, say one month. Parties can be permitted 
to extend time by one year. Pending the application for 
extension, we propose to allow the arbitration proceedings 
to continue.(…)
xx xx xx
2.21.4 It is, therefore, proposed to implement the 
recommendation made in the 76th Report of the Law 
Commission with the modification that an award must be 
passed at least within one year of the arbitrators entering on 
the reference. The initial period will be one year. Thereafter, 
parties can, by consent, extend the period upto a maximum 
of another one year. Beyond the one year plus the period 
agreed to by mutual consent, the court will have to grant 
extension. Applications for extension are to be disposed 
of within one month. While granting extension, the court 
may impose costs and also indicate the future procedure 
to be followed by the tribunal . There will, therefore, be a 
further proviso, that further extension beyond the period 
stated above should be granted by the Court. We are 
not inclined to suggest a cap on the power of extension 
as recommended by the Law Commission earlier. There 
may be cases where the court feels that more than 24 
months is necessary. It can be left to the court to fix an 
upper limit. It must be provided that beyond 24 months, 
neither the parties by consent, nor the arbitral tribunal could 
extend the period. The court’s order will be necessary in 
this regard. But in order to see that delay in disposal of 
extension applications does not hamper arbitration, we 
propose to allow arbitration to continue pending disposal 
of the application.
2.21.5 One other important aspect here is that if there is 
a delay beyond the initial one year and the period agreed 
to by the parties (with an upper of another one year) and 
also any period of extension granted by the Court, there 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
309
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
is no point in terminating the arbitration proceedings. We 
propose it as they should be continued till award is passed. 
Such a termination may indeed result in waste of time and 
money for the parties after lot of evidence is led. In fact, 
if the proceedings were to terminate and the claimant is 
to file a separate suit, it will even become necessary to 
exclude the period spent in arbitration proceedings, if he 
was not at fault, by amending sec. 43(5) to cover such a 
situation. But the Commission is of the view that there is 
a better solution to the problem.
The Commission, therefore, proposes to see that an 
arbitral award is ultimately passed even if the above said 
delays have taken place. In order that there is no further 
delay, the Commission proposes that after the period of 
initial one year and the further period agreed to by the 
parties (subject to a maximum of one year) is over, the 
arbitration proceedings will nearly stand suspended and 
will get revived as soon as any party to the proceedings 
files an application in the Court for extension of time. In 
case none of the parties files an application, even then 
the arbitral tribunal may seek an extension from the Court. 
From the moment the application is filed, the arbitration 
proceedings can be continued. When the Court takes 
up the application for extension, it shall grant extension 
subject to any order as to costs and it shall fix up the 
time schedule for the future procedure before the arbitral 
tribunal. It will initially pass an order granting extension of 
time and fixing the time frame before the arbitral tribunal 
and will continue to pass further orders till time the award 
is passed. This procedure will ensure that ultimately an 
award is passed.”
(emphasis supplied)
IX.	 Introduction of Section 29A & its interpretation:
11.	 It is in the above-referred background that the Arbitration Act was 
amended with retrospective effect from 23.10.2015 to effectively deal 
with delays in arbitral proceedings by inserting Section 29A. The 
Statement of Objects and Reasons records that practical difficulties 

310
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
had arisen, necessitating amendments to make arbitration more 
user-friendly, cost-effective, and expeditious. Accordingly, provision 
was made requiring the arbitral tribunal to render the award within 
twelve months from the date it enters upon the reference, with 
liberty to the parties to extend the period by a further six months, 
any extension thereafter being permissible only by order of the Court 
on sufficient cause being shown. Thereafter, the Act of 1996 was 
further amended w.e.f. 30-8-2019 to provide, inter alia, that, where 
an application seeking extension of time under sub-section (5) of 
Section 29A is pending, the mandate of the arbitrator shall continue 
until such application is finally decided. 
11.1	 Section 29A of the 1996 Act as amended is extracted below 
for ready reference;
“Section 29A: Time limit for arbitral award.
(1) The award in matters other than international 
commercial arbitration shall be made by the arbitral 
tribunal within a period of twelve months from the 
date of completion of pleadings under sub-section 
(4) of section 23.
Provided that the award in the matter of international 
commercial arbitration may be made as expeditiously 
as possible and endeavour may be made to dispose 
off the matter within a period of twelve months from 
the date of completion of pleadings under sub-section 
(4) of section 23.
(2) If the award is made within a period of six months 
from the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the 
reference, the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to 
receive such amount of additional fees as the parties 
may agree.
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period 
specified in sub-section (1) for making award for a 
further period not exceeding six months.
(4) If the award is not made within the period specified 
in sub-section (1) or the extended period specified 
under sub-section (3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s) 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
311
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
shall terminate unless the Court has, either prior to or 
after the expiry of the period so specified, extended 
the period:
Provided that while extending the period under this 
sub-section, if the Court finds that the proceedings 
have been delayed for the reasons attributable to 
the arbitral tribunal, then, it may order reduction of 
fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding five per cent. 
for each month of such delay:
[Provided further that where an application under sub-
section (5) is pending, the mandate of the arbitrator 
shall continue till the disposal of the said application:
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an 
opportunity of being heard before the fees is reduced.]
(5) The extension of period referred to in sub-section 
(4) may be on the application of any of the parties 
and may be granted only for sufficient cause and 
on such terms and conditions as may be imposed 
by the Court.
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub-
section (4), it shall be open to the Court to substitute 
one or all of the arbitrators and if one or all of the 
arbitrators are substituted, the arbitral proceedings 
shall continue from the stage already reached and 
on the basis of the evidence and material already 
on record, and the arbitrator(s) appointed under this 
section shall be deemed to have received the said 
evidence and material.
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under 
this section, the arbitral tribunal thus reconstituted 
shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously 
appointed arbitral tribunal.
(8) It shall be open to the Court to impose actual or 
exemplary costs upon any of the parties under this 
section.
(9) An application filed under sub-section (5) shall be 
disposed of by the Court as expeditiously as possible, 

312
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter 
within a period of sixty days from the date of service 
of notice on the opposite party.”
X.	
International perspective on the validity of the arbitral award 
rendered after the stipulated statutory time limit.
12.	 It is well recognized that a fixed time limit for the rendering of an 
arbitral award may foreclose the mandate of a tribunal if breached. 
However, such limits are not intended to frustrate the arbitral process. 
In appropriate cases, Courts have retroactively extended timelines 
and even upheld awards rendered outside agreed deadlines where 
it was necessary to preserve justice and prevent the arbitration from 
being defeated by technical non-compliance.
12.1	 Under the earlier English Arbitration Act, 1950, Section 27 
expressly empowered the Court to enlarge the time for making 
an award “whether that time has expired or not.” Interpreting 
this provision, the English Court of Appeal in Oakland Metal 
Co Ltd. v. D. Benaim & Co. Ld.9 confirmed that the expiry of 
a contractual time limit does not automatically extinguish the 
Court’s jurisdiction to enlarge time. The Court recognised that it 
retained a wide discretion to extend time even after the agreed 
deadline had passed, thereby preventing the arbitration from 
failing solely by effluxion of time.
12.2	 Similar language has been retained in the current English 
Arbitration Act 1996. Section 50(4) provides that the Court’s 
power to extend the time for making an award “may be 
exercised whether or not the time previously fixed has expired.” 
The statutory scheme, therefore, makes it clear that an agreed 
deadline for making an arbitral award does not automatically 
and irreversibly invalidate an award rendered late. Rather, the 
Act preserves a retrospective judicial power to extend time, 
where the statutory conditions are met.
12.3	 Although English case law directly applying section 50(4) 
remains limited, leading commentaries have recognized that, 
where an arbitral tribunal fails to comply with an agreed time 
9	
[1953] 2 QB 261.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
313
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
limit, recourse to the Court may be the only practical solution. 
For example, Jeffrey Waincymer observes in Procedure and 
Evidence in International Arbitration that difficulties arise where 
an arbitrator is removed or replaced for failure to comply with 
a time limit, and the deadline has already expired. In such 
circumstances, Courts may step in and even retroactively 
extend the mandate:
“If a time limit is imposed and an application is made 
to remove an arbitrator for failing to comply with the 
time limit, a problem arises in terms of the powers of 
a truncated or replacement tribunal to subsequently 
render an award. If there is no power to extend, how 
can a truncated tribunal or a replacement arbitrator 
meet the deadline that has expired? Some lex arbitri 
allow for extensions in such circumstances. The 
functus officio problem has led Belgian law to adopt 
a more practical solution to the effect that after six 
months has elapsed, the parties may apply to the 
court to set a time limit for rendering of the award. 
Section 50(4) of the English Arbitration Act 1996 
allows a court to extend the time even if the time 
previously fixed has expired.10
(emphasis supplied)
12.4	 In Redfern and Hunter on International Arbitration, it is noted 
that Courts in many jurisdictions have been reluctant to 
invalidate an award solely on the basis that it was rendered late:
“It is important that a fixed time limit for rendering the 
award should not enable one of the parties to frustrate 
the arbitration. This might happen if a fixed limit were 
to run from the date of the appointment of the arbitral 
tribunal, rather than, for example, that of the end of 
the hearings. If a court has no power to intervene on 
the application of one party alone and the time limit 
can be extended only by agreement of the parties, 
a party might frustrate the proceedings simply by 
10	
‘Part II: The Process of an Arbitration, Chapter 6: Establishing the Procedural Framework’, in Jeffrey 
Maurice Waincymer, Procedure and Evidence in International Arbitration (2012), p. 418.

314
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
refusing to agree to any extension of time. However, 
the courts of many countries would be reluctant to 
invalidate a late award in such a case. For example, 
in New York, it was held that an untimely award was 
not a nullity, even though the issue of timeliness was 
properly raised: the court stated that, without a finding 
of prejudice, there was no justification for denying 
confirmation of the award.”11 
(emphasis supplied)
12.5	 Commentaries on institutional rules such as ICC Rules 
acknowledge similar powers. Article 31(1) of the Rules sets 
a six-month limit from the signing of the terms of reference 
for the rendering of the final award. Under Article 31(2), a 
Court may render an extension of the time limit and revive the 
mandate of a tribunal that is deemed functus officio. In doing 
so, a Court may retroactively revive the tribunal’s mandate, 
and even render an award passed beyond the time limit valid.12
12.6	 A recent decision of the Privy Council further illustrates this 
pragmatic approach. In Alphamix Ltd v District Council of 
Rivière du Rempart (Mauritius)13, the Privy Council upheld an 
arbitral award that had been annulled by the Mauritian Courts 
on the basis that it was issued three days after the agreed 
deadline. The applicable Mauritian Civil Procedure Code 
provided that an arbitrator’s mandate would lapse after six 
months unless extended, and that an award rendered outside 
the mandate was liable to annulment. Although the award was 
formally issued three days late, the Privy Council found that 
the parties had tacitly and unequivocally agreed to permit the 
short delay, particularly in light of the arbitrator’s illness and the 
absence of objection from either party. That tacit agreement 
was held to have extended the arbitrator’s mandate, with the 
result that the award remained valid.
11	
‘9. Award’, in Nigel Blackaby, Constantine Partasides, et al., Redfern and Hunter on International 
Arbitration (Seventh Edition) (2023), at para.9.169.
12	
Fadri Lenggenhager, ‘Chapter 17, Part II: Commentary on the ICC Rules, Article 31 [Time limit for the 
final award]’, in Manuel Arroyo (ed), Arbitration in Switzerland: The Practitioner’s Guide (Second Edition) 
(2018). pp. 2447.
13	
[2023] UKPC 20, at para 26.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
315
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
12.7	 By contrast, there are also authorities demonstrating that 
Courts may annul late awards where delay is substantial 
and unjustified. Under Singapore law, the High Court in Ting 
Kang Chung John v Teo Hee Lai Building Constructions Pte 
Ltd.14 set aside an award that had been issued well beyond 
the agreed deadline. The arbitration concerned a modest 
construction dispute conducted under the Arbitration Rules 
of the Singapore Institute of Architects, which required the 
arbitrator to issue an award within 60 days of the close of the 
hearing. The arbitrator issued the award more than a year 
after that deadline.
12.8	 When the award was challenged, the arbitrator sought belatedly 
to apply for an extension of time. The Court refused his 
application, noting that where parties had agreed to specify 
a deadline for the award to be issued, the principle of party 
autonomy meant that the Court should not lightly override 
this agreement. The Court noted that an extension would be 
granted only to (i) prevent substantial injustice, (ii) where there 
was no prejudice to the opposing party, and (iii) where there 
were very good reasons to justify the delay. One crucial factor 
in refusing the application was the failure by the arbitrator to 
apply for an extension until after his award was challenged.
XI.	 Conclusions
13.	 Section 29A, as explained in recent decisions of this Court in Rohan 
Builders (supra), Lancor Holdings (supra) and Jagdeep Chowgule v. 
Sheela Chowgule15 can be formulated as under:
(I)	
Sub-section (1) of Section 29A mandates that the award shall 
be made within 12 months of the completion of pleadings 
before the Arbitral Tribunal16. While sub-section (2) incentivises 
expeditious making of the Award, proviso to sub-section (4) 
14	
[2010] SGHC 20, at para. 41.
15	
2026 INSC 92.
16	
Explained, in Rohan Builders (India) Pvt Ltd v. Berger Paints India Limited, 2024 SC Online SC 2494, as 
“Prior to the enactment of Section 29A of the A & C Act did not specify a time limit for making an arbitral 
award. This was deliberate, given the fact that the First Schedule and Section 28 of the Arbitration 
Act, 1940 led to litigation and delay. Section 29A, as quoted above, was inserted by Act 3 of 2016 with 
retrospective effect from 23.10.2015. The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 aimed to 
ensure that arbitration proceedings are completed without unnecessary adjournments and delay.”

316
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
and sub-section (8)authorises the Court to impose penalty for 
delay in making the award. 
(II)	 Sub-section (3) enables parties, by consent, to extend the 
period of 12 months for making the award by a further period 
not exceeding 6 months.
(III)	 If the award is not made within the stipulated period of 12 
months or the extended period of 6 months, the mandate of 
the arbitrator(s) shall terminate17.
(IV)	
This termination is subject to the power of the Court to extend 
the period18.
(V)	
The ‘Court’ under Section 29A shall be the Civil Court of 
ordinary original jurisdiction in a district and includes the High 
Court in exercise of its original civil jurisdiction under Section 
2(1)(e), and shall not be the High Court or the Supreme Court 
under Section 11(6) of the Act. Section 42 of the Act relating 
to jurisdiction for applications will also not apply to Section 
11 of the Act19. 
(VI)	
There is no statutory prescribed time limit for the Court to 
exercise the power under Section 29A(4) for extending the 
period, except for its own discretion. The Court can exercise 
the power before or after the expiry of the period under sub-
17	
Section 29A(4) of the 1996 Act.
18	
The Law Commission’s 176th Report @ 2.21.5 explains the purpose and object of vesting of this power 
as follows: “One other important aspect here is that if there is a delay beyond the initial one year and 
the period agreed to by the parties (with an upper of another one year) and also any period of extension 
granted by the Court, there is no point in terminating the arbitration proceedings. We propose it as they 
should be continued till award is passed. Such a termination may indeed result in waste of time and 
money for the parties after lot of evidence is led. In fact, if the proceedings were to terminate and the 
claimant is to file a separate suit, it will even become necessary to exclude the period spent in arbitration 
proceedings, if he was not at fault, by amending sec. 43(5) to cover such a situation. But the Commission 
is of the view that there is a better solution to the problem. The Commission, therefore, proposes to 
see that an arbitral award is ultimately passed even if the above said delays have taken place. In order 
that there is no further delay, the Commission proposes that after the period of initial one year and 
the further period agreed to by the parties (subject to a maximum of one year) is over, the arbitration 
proceedings will nearly stand suspended and will get revived as soon as any party to the proceedings 
files an application in the Court for extension of time. In case none of the parties files an application, even 
then the arbitral tribunal may seek an extension from the Court. From the moment the application is filed, 
the arbitration proceedings can be continued. When the Court takes up the application for extension, it 
shall grant extension subject to any order as to costs and it shall fix up the time schedule for the future 
procedure before the arbitral tribunal. It will initially pass an order granting extension of time and fixing 
the time frame before the arbitral tribunal and will continue to pass further orders till time the award is 
passed. This procedure will ensure that ultimately an award is passed.” 
19	
State of West Bengal v. Associated Contractors (2015) 1 SCC 32.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
317
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
sections 29A(1) or (3)20. Further, there is no prescription of an 
outer limit for extending the time for the conclusion of arbitral 
proceedings. Given this power, the Court will exercise it with 
circumspection, balancing the remedy with the rights of other 
stakeholders.
(VII)	 The power of the Court to extend the time under sub-section 
(4) may be exercised on an application by any of the parties. 
Once such an application for extension of time is pending, the 
mandate of the arbitrator shall continue till the disposal of such 
application under sub-section (9). The Court shall endeavour 
to dispose of such an application within 60 days21. 
(VIII)	 Delay in the delivery of an arbitral award, by itself, is not 
sufficient to set aside that award. It is only when the effect of 
the undue delay in the delivery of an arbitral award is explicit 
and adversely reflects on the findings therein, such delay and, 
more so, if it remains unexplained, can be construed to result 
in the award being in conflict with the public policy of India.22
(IX)	
Under Section 29A(6), while exercising the power of extension, 
it shall be open to the Court to substitute one or all the 
arbitrators. This is a discretionary power that the Court would 
exercise in the facts and circumstances of the case. Upon 
substitution, the reconstituted tribunal shall be deemed to 
be in continuation of the previously appointed tribunal as per 
Section 29A(7) and shall continue from the stage already 
reached and on the basis of evidence already on record. The 
newly appointed arbitrators shall be deemed to have received 
the evidence and materials.
(X)	
Vesting of the power of substitution, under Section 29A(6), 
is on the “Court” and this Court is the “Court” as defined in 
Section 2(1)(e). The text, as well as the context for identifying 
the Court in Section 29A(6), as well as in Section 29A(4), is 
the Court in Section 2(1)(e). The expression ‘Court’ in other 
provisions must be guided by the meaning given in Section 
2(1)(e) 23. 
20	
Section 29A(4) of the 1996 Act. 
21	
Section 29A(9) of the 1996 Act. 
22	
Lancor Holdings (supra).
23	
Jagdeep Chowgule (supra).

318
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
14.	 Section 29A of the Act does not, in terms, bar an application for 
extension of the mandate of an arbitrator in the event of the delivery 
of an award. There is no such prescription anywhere in the section. 
In the first place, if an award is made after expiry of the mandate, 
then there is no doubt about the fact that such an award is non 
est. A better expression would be to hold that such an award would 
be unenforceable under Section 36. Such an award need not be 
challenged under Section 34. 
15.	 Naturally, a unilateral act or the indiscretion of the arbitrator in making 
such an award will have no bearing on the power and jurisdiction 
vested in the Court under Section 29A. We have more hesitation in 
concluding that the Parliament has never intended that the act of 
an arbitrator in delivering an award when the mandate had expired 
would denude the power and jurisdiction vested in the Court. This 
power and jurisdiction stand on its own footing and is uninfluenced 
by the act of the arbitrator in passing an award without mandate.
16.	 Secondly, the expression, “if an award is not made” in sub-section 
(4) is employed in the context of enabling the Court to extend the 
mandate of the arbitrator. The context in which the phrase is used 
makes it clear that the sub-section is not addressing a situation 
where an arbitral award has been rendered after the mandate of 
the arbitrator has expired, but rather to declare that the Court can 
extend the period before or after the expiry of the mandate. This is 
clearly explained in Rohan Builders (supra).
17.	 Rohan Builders (supra) also clarifies the context in which the 
expression ‘terminates’ has been used in the section. It is explained 
that it is transitory and is subject to the exercise of power by the Court. 
“14. Accordingly, the termination of the arbitral mandate is 
conditional upon the non-filing of an extension application 
and cannot be treated as termination stricto sensu. The 
word “terminate” in the contextual form does not reflect 
termination as if the proceedings have come to a legal 
and final end, and cannot continue even on filing of an 
application for extension of time. Therefore, termination 
under Section 29A(4) is not set in stone or absolutistic in 
character. 
20. Lastly, Section 29A(6) does not support the narrow 
interpretation of the expression “terminate”. It states 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
319
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
that the court - while deciding an extension application 
under Section 29A(4) - may substitute one or all the 
arbitrators. Section 29A(7) states that if a new arbitrator(s) 
is appointed, the reconstituted Arbitral Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be in continuation of the previously appointed 
Arbitral Tribunal. This obliterates the need to file a fresh 
application under Section 11 of the A & C Act for the 
appointment of an arbitrator. In the event of substitution of 
arbitrator(s), the arbitral proceedings will commence from 
the stage already reached. Evidence or material already on 
record is deemed to be received by the newly constituted 
tribunal. The aforesaid deeming provisions underscore the 
legislative intent to effectuate efficiency and expediency 
in the arbitral process. This intent is also demonstrated in 
Sections 29A(8) and 29A(9). The court in terms of Section 
29A(8) has the power to impose actual or exemplary costs 
upon the parties. Lastly, Section 29A(9) stipulates that an 
application for extension under sub-section (5) must be 
disposed of expeditiously, with the endeavour of doing so 
within sixty days from the date of filing.”
18.	 Intention of the Parliament to secure the arbitral proceedings and 
to ensure that they are taken to their logical conclusion of a binding 
award is evident from provisions such as, enabling Courts to exercise 
the power of extension before or after the expiry of the 18 month 
period [Section 29A(4)], declaring continuation of the proceedings 
till the application for extension is pending [proviso to 29A(4)], 
declaring that upon extension, the existing proceedings would 
continue uninterruptedly [Section 29A(6) & (7)]. These provisions 
make it evident that the intention of the Parliament is to safeguard 
the conduct and conclusion of arbitral proceedings.
19.	 Though the fact situation that has arisen in our case was not available 
in Rohan Builders (supra) in the sense that the arbitrator had not 
passed an award after expiry of the mandate, the following observation 
in Rohan Builders is relevant for our consideration;
“21. …The power to extend time period for making of 
the award vests with the court, and not with the Arbitral 
Tribunal. Therefore, the Arbitral Tribunal may not pronounce 
the award till an application under Section 29A(5) of the 

320
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
A & C Act is sub-judice before the court. In a given case, 
where an award is pronounced during the pendency of an 
application for extension of period of the Arbitral Tribunal, 
the court must still decide the application under sub-section 
(5), and may even, where an award has been pronounced, 
invoke, when required and justified, sub-sections (6) to 
(8), or the first and third proviso to Section 29A(4) of the 
A & C Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
20.	 Vesting of power and jurisdiction in the Court, in our opinion, is a 
complete answer to any apprehension that extension of time, even 
in cases where an ‘award’ is passed, could introduce a culture of 
indiscipline, as arbitrator(s) and/or counsels could become indifferent 
to the mandatory timelines. This apprehension is not true. There is 
no automatic extension of time. The Court will and must exercise 
its discretion only after evaluating the facts and circumstances 
after close scrutiny. Section 29A, in terms, enables the court to 
adopt distinct measures to ensure dynamic and efficient conduct 
of arbitral proceedings with integrity and expedition. The following 
empowerments are in the nature of instruments in the toolkit of 
Section 29A, enabling the courts to deploy them as and when the 
factual matrix demands:
i.	
Court has the power to extend the time before or after the expiry 
of the statutorily stipulated period. [Section 29A(4)]
ii.	
Court is empowered to take measures to reduce the fee of the 
arbitrators if the Court is of the opinion that the proceedings 
are delayed for the reasons attributable to the Arbitrators. 
[Proviso to Section 29A(4)]
iii.	
Court can grant an extension of the time period upon a 
finding that there is sufficient cause for such extension. 
[Section 29A(5)]
iv.	
Court, while extending the mandate even when there is sufficient 
cause, is empowered to impose such terms and conditions as it 
thinks fit for efficiency and integrity of the arbitral proceedings. 
[Section 29A(5)]

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
321
C. Velusamy v. K Indhera
v.	
Courts are specifically empowered to substitute any one or all 
the arbitrators, if in the opinion of the Court the facts demand. 
This is a discretion that the Court would exercise with caution 
and circumspection24. [Section 29A(6)]
vi.	
The Court is empowered not only to grant costs but also to 
impose exemplary and actual costs upon any of the parties, if 
the situation so demands. [Section 29A(8)]
21.	 In view of the above analysis, we are of the opinion that provisions 
of the Act, particularly Section 29A, must not be interpreted to infer 
a threshold bar for an application under Section 29A(5) for extension 
of the mandate of the arbitrator even when an award is passed, 
though after the expiry of the mandate. 
22.	 While interpreting an enactment providing legal remedies for the 
resolution of disputes, a constitutional court has the obligation 
to ensure that the provision is: (a) accessible, (b) affordable, 
(c) expeditious and (d) cohesive. Accessibility requires the remedy 
to be easily available25. Affordability is an aspect that is related to 
the cost of availing the remedy, it must be at a reasonable price. 
Expeditious nature of a remedy is concerned with the quick disposal 
and abhors unreasonable delays. Yet another facet of effective 
remedy is in its cohesiveness.
23.	 In conclusion, we hold that an application under Section 29A(5) 
for extension of the mandate of the arbitrator is maintainable even 
after the expiry of the time under Sections 29A(1) and (3) and even 
after rendering of an award during that time. Such an award is 
ineffective and unenforceable. But the power of the court to consider 
extension is not impaired by such an indiscretion of the arbitrator. 
While considering the application, the Court will examine if there is 
sufficient cause for extending the mandate, and in the process, it 
may impose such terms and conditions as the situation demands. 
24	
It is clarified that Mohan Lal Fatehpuria v. M/s Bharat Textiles & Ors. 2025 INSC 1409 does not mandate 
the substitution of an arbitrator as an inevitable consequence when the court is considering extension 
of mandate that had already expired as was argued. In fact, it is clear that the judgment proceeds to 
substitute the arbitrator as the situation “warranted”. The court held “in view of the statutory scheme and 
undisputed factual position, we are satisfied that the case warranted the exercise of jurisdiction under 
Section 29A(6) of the Act”. This quotation is sufficient to conclude that the power of substitution would be 
exercised as such by the Court as a discretion and in the facts and circumstances of the case. 
25	
NBCC (India) Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, 2025 INSC 54.

322
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
The Court will also take into account other factors such as reduction 
of the fee of the arbitrator under proviso to Section 29A(4) and also 
impose costs on parties if the fact situation so demands. Substitution 
is an option for the Court as the provision itself says, “it shall be 
open for the Court to substitute”, and it will be exercised carefully. If 
the mandate is extended, the arbitral tribunal will pick up the thread 
from where it was left, and seamlessly continue the proceeding from 
the stage at which the mandate had expired, and conclude within 
the time granted.
24.	 In view of the above, the appeal against the judgment and order 
dated 24.01.2025 in Application No. 5993 of 2024 passed by the 
High Court of Judicature at Madras is allowed. The Application No. 
5993 of 2024 is restored to its original number and the High Court 
will proceed with the said application and dispose it of as per the 
principles laid down in our judgment. 
Result of the case: Appeal against the judgment in Application 
No. 5993 of 2024 is allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Divya Pandey


