[2026] 2 S.C.R. 139 : 2026 INSC 36
Md Imran @ D.C. Guddu
v.
The State of Jharkhand
(Criminal Appeal No. 109 of 2026)
07 January 2026
[J.B. Pardiwala and K.V. Viswanathan, JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the accused added during trial u/s.319 CrPC, 
entitled to bail.
Headnotes†
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 – s.319 – Power to proceed 
against other persons appearing to be guilty – FIR registered 
against nine accused persons, however chargesheet filed only 
against three accused persons, whereas the closure report 
filed as regards the remaining six co-accused – On basis of 
the oral evidence of the eye-witnesses, application u/s.319 
filed by the first informant before the trial court seeking that 
the six co-accused dropped by the police to be added and 
summoned as accused to face the trial – Application partly 
allowed, out of the six accused who were dropped, three 
accused persons summoned – Appellant arrested pursuant 
to non-bailable warrant issued against him, and the other two 
granted anticipatory bail by the High Court – Correctness:
Held: When a person is added as an accused u/s.319 and that 
person is ultimately arrested and prays for bail, the relevant 
consideration at the end of the court while considering his plea for 
bail should be the strong and cogent evidence than mere probability 
of his complicity – Test to be applied is one which is more than prima 
facie case as exercised at the time of framing of charge, but short 
of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes unrebutted 
would lead to conviction – Court should weigh factors like the 
nature of the offence, the quality of the evidence against the new 
accused and the likelihood of the person absconding or tampering 
with evidence – Court must be satisfied that there is strong and 
cogent evidence of the person’s complicity at the threshold i.e. 
much higher than that required for framing charges against the 
original accused – Thus, on facts, appellant to be released on bail 

140
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
subject to terms and conditions that the trial court may deem fit 
to impose – Other two accused already on anticipatory bail – No 
case made out by the State for cancellation of anticipatory bail. 
[Paras 14, 15, 17, 18]
List of Acts
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; Penal Code, 1860; Arms Act.
List of Keywords
Bail; Oral evidence of the eye-witnesses; Adding of accused.
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
109 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 08.04.2025 of the High Court 
of Jharkhand at Ranchi in BA No. 2758 of 2025
With
Criminal Appeal No. 110 of 2026
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ms. Pragya Baghel, Ms. Pallavi Langar, Sujeet Kumar Chaubey, 
Rajeev Singh, Samant Singh, Ms. Shefali Jain, Ms. Anu H. 
Kirutthika, Rohit Singh, Ashwani Kumar Singh, Rajeev Singh.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Ms. Pallavi Langar, Ms. Pragya Baghel, Sujeet Kumar Chaubey, 
Ganesh Khanna, Satyabeer Singh, Gauraw Kumar, Himanshu 
Bhushan, Ashok Anand, Rakesh Kumar Singh, Ajay Gupta, Akash 
Kakade, Parshant Phad.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Order
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
Since the issues involved in both the captioned appeals are the 
same, those were taken up for hearing analogously and are being 
disposed of by this common order.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
141
Md Imran @ D.C. Guddu v. The State of Jharkhand
3.	
So far as the Appeal arising out of S.L.P. (Crl) No. 12110/2025 is 
concerned, the same has been filed by one MD Imran @ D.C. Guddu.
4.	
The appeal filed by Imran @ D.C. Guddu arises from the order passed 
by the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi dated 08.04.2025 in BA 
No.2758/2025 by which the bail application filed by the appellant in 
connection with Daily Market Police Station Case No. 46 of 2018, 
arising out of S.T. No. 100239 of 2019 registered for the offence 
punishable under Sections 147, 148, 149 and 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code (for short “IPC”) respectively and Sections 25(1-B)A/26/27/35 
of the Arms Act respectively came to be rejected.
5.	
It appears from the materials on record that the appellant herein viz. 
MD Imran @ D.C. Guddu was one of the accused persons named 
in the FIR lodged by the father of the deceased.
6.	
The FIR was registered against in all nine accused persons. At the 
end of the investigation chargesheet came to be filed only against 
three accused persons, whereas the closure report was filed so far 
as the other six co-accused are concerned. In the course of the 
trial, the eye-witnesses to the incident who are all family members 
of the deceased deposed as regards the involvement of all the nine 
accused persons originally named in the FIR.
7.	
The depositions of the eyewitnesses were recorded sometime in 
2020 and 2021 respectively. In the year 2022 the first informant 
preferred an application under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C., before 
the trial court with a prayer that the other six co-accused who came 
to be dropped by the police should be added and summoned as 
accused to face the trial. Such application was filed on the strength 
of the oral evidence of the eye-witnesses which came on record.
8.	
The application filed by the first informant was looked into by the trial 
court and ultimately the same came to be partly allowed. Out of the 
six accused who were dropped, the trial court thought fit to summon 
three accused persons. So far as the other three are concerned, 
the trial court did not deem fit to add them in exercise of its powers 
under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C.
9.	
It is not in dispute that the original order passed by the trial court 
under Section 319 of the Cr.P.C. never came to be challenged. It 
attained finality. The appellant herein MD Imran @ D.C. Guddu 
came to be arrested pursuant to a non-bailable warrant issued 

142
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
against him. In so far as the respondents in the connected matters 
are concerned, before they could be arrested, they went before the 
High Court and prayed for anticipatory bail. The High Court granted 
them anticipatory bail.
10.	 In such circumstances referred to above, we have two appeals before 
us one filed by the accused MD Imran @ D.C. Guddu who came 
to be arrested and is in judicial custody and the connected appeal 
has been filed by the State of Jharkhand being aggrieved by the 
order passed by the High Court releasing the other two co-accused 
on anticipatory bail.
11.	 Since the three accused have now been summoned, the trial against 
them will have to proceed afresh. We are informed that charges 
have been framed.
12.	 We heard Mr. Samant Singh, Mr. Rakesh Kumar Singh & Mr. Ganesh 
Khanna, the learned counsel appearing for the respective accused 
persons and Ms. Pragya Baghel, the learned counsel appearing for 
the State of Jharkhand.
13.	 We looked into the matter threadbare. We also looked into the oral 
evidence of the eyewitnesses on the strength of which the three 
accused have now been summoned to face the trial for the offence 
of murder.
14.	 When a person is added as an accused under Section 319 Cr.P.C. 
and that person is ultimately arrested and prays for bail, the relevant 
consideration at the end of the court while considering his plea for 
bail should be the strong and cogent evidence than mere probability 
of his complicity. The test that has to be applied is one which is 
more than prima facie case as exercised at the time of framing of 
charge, but short of satisfaction to an extent that the evidence, if goes 
unrebutted would lead to conviction. The Court should weigh factors 
like the nature of the offence, the quality of the evidence against 
the new accused and the likelihood of the person absconding or 
tampering with evidence. In other words, the court must be satisfied 
that there is strong and cogent evidence of the person’s complicity at 
the threshold i.e. much higher than that required for framing charges 
against the original accused.
15.	 The other two co-accused namely MD Samsher and MD Arshad 
respectively are already on anticipatory bail since 02.07.2025. We 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
143
Md Imran @ D.C. Guddu v. The State of Jharkhand
are informed that they have been appearing before the trial court 
on all dates.
16.	 Since the matter is at large before the trial court, we need not observe 
anything further.
17.	 It is ordered that MD Imran @ D.C. Guddu shall be released on 
bail subject to terms and conditions that the trial court may deem 
fit to impose.
18.	 So far as the other two accused are concerned, they are already on 
anticipatory bail. No case is made out by the State for cancellation 
of anticipatory bail.
19.	 In the result, the appeal filed by MD Imran @ D.C Guddu stands 
allowed and the appeal filed by the State of Jharkhand stands 
dismissed.
20.	 We make it clear that all the three accused shall regularly appear 
before the trial court and cooperate in expeditious disposal of the trial.
21.	 We further make it clear that the observations in this order are only 
for the purpose of deciding the bail application of MD Imran @ D.C. 
Guddu as well as for consideration of the State appeal against the 
order granting anticipatory bail to Md. Shamsher Alam and Md. 
Arshad. The trial court will proceed in accordance with law and the 
trial court will not be influenced by the observations in this order.
22.	 Pending Application(s) if any shall stand disposed of. 
Result of the case: Appeal filed by the accused allowed. 
Appeal filed by the State dismissed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
