[2026] 2 S.C.R. 86 : 2026 INSC 34
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd.
v.
Tuticorin Port Trust
(Civil Appeal No. 98 of 2026)
07 January 2026
[Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha and Pankaj Mithal,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Whether the Division Bench of the High Court in exercise of powers 
u/s.37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 was justified to 
interfere with the judgment and order of the Single Judge of the 
High Court passed u/s.34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 upholding the award of the Arbitral Tribunal.
Headnotes†
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Major Port Trust 
Act, 1963 – The respondent-Tuticorin Port Trust undertook a 
major dredging project and issued Notice Inviting Tender – 
The appellant-Dredging India was one of the bidders and the 
contract was awarded to it – The appellant-Dredging India 
completed work project much ahead of schedule – Disputes 
arose between the parties relating to alleged non-payment 
and under-payment of dues as raised under the final bill – 
Arbitration clause was invoked by the the appellant-Dredging 
India – The Arbitral Tribunal vide its award dated 18.10.2014 
inter alia awarded an amount of Rs.14,66,04,216/- – The arbitral 
award was challenged by the respondent-Port Trust u/s.34 of 
the 1996 Act – The award of the Arbitral Tribunal was upheld 
by the Single Judge of the High Court – However, the High 
Court directed for the deletion of the claim awarded by the 
Arbitral Tribunal in respect of Claim No.7 i.e. idle charges for 
the Backhoe Dredger (BHD) – Correctness:
Held: In the instant case, the power to award compensation for 
idle time of the equipment including Backhoe Dredger is traceable 
to Clause 51.1 of the Lease Agreement and therefore the Arbitral 
Tribunal was not wrong in interpreting the clauses so as to make an 
award in favour of the appellant-Dredging India under Claim No.7 – 
* Author

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
87
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
In such a situation, the interpretation given by the Arbitral Tribunal 
is apparently a plausible view and was rightly not disturbed by the 
Single Judge in exercise of power u/s.34 of the Act – Therefore, in 
appeal u/s.37 of the Act, the said reasoning could not have been 
disturbed so as to permit a different view – The interpretation given 
by the Arbitral Tribunal had to be accepted by the Appellate Court – 
In the case at hand, the Arbitral Award contains logical reasons in 
construing the various clauses of the License Agreement and the 
view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal had been accepted by the court 
u/s.34 of the Act as a reasonable and a possible view – The License 
Agreement permits deployment of Backhoe Dredger (BHD) without 
specifying whether it is a minor or a major dredger – This Court is 
of the opinion that the Appellate Court manifestly erred in law in 
interfering with the judgment and order of the Single Judge of the 
High Court passed u/s.34 of the Act so as to disturb the arbitral 
award in respect of Claim No.7. [Paras 46, 48, 49, 50]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.34 – Whether the 
Challenge to the award, in the instant case was on any of the 
grounds enumerated u/s.34 or on the ground that the award 
of the Claim No.7 is against the fundamental policy of India 
or the basic notions of morality or justice:
Held: In the case at hand, a challenge to the award of the Arbitral 
Tribunal before the Single Judge of the High Court would reveal 
that it was confined to Claim No.7 and that too on the merits of 
the same and not on the ground of violation of the public policy of 
India or that it is against the basic notions of morality or justice – 
The Arbitral Tribunal, in making the award, has interpreted the 
various clauses of the License Agreement so as to hold that the 
appellant-Dredging India is entitled for appropriate compensation 
with regard to idling of its Backhoe Dredger (BHD) for want of 
non-supply of site within time – Apparently, the challenge to the 
award of the Arbitral Tribunal was neither on any of the grounds 
enumerated u/s.34, nor even on the ground that the award of 
the Claim No.7 is against the fundamental policy of India or the 
basic notions of morality or justice – That being the position, the 
award of the Arbitral Tribunal was not liable to be disturbed u/s.34 
of the Act and was rightly not disturbed – It is settled in law that 
the appellate powers u/s.37 are limited to the scope of s.34 and 
cannot exceed beyond it – The award of the Arbitral Tribunal is 
not contrary to any substantive provision of law or any provision 
of the Act. [Paras 28, 29, 30, 38]

88
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.34 – Grounds for 
challenging the arbitral award:
Held: The Act provides for the challenge of the arbitral award before 
the court on limited grounds as contemplated by s.34 of the Act 
i.e. where one of the party was under some incapacity; or where 
the arbitration agreement itself was not valid; or the parties were 
not given proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or the 
arbitral proceedings; or was unable, for some reason, to present 
his case before the Arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal; or if the arbitral 
award deals with the dispute not contemplated or falling within 
the terms of the arbitration or deals with the matters beyond the 
scope of the arbitration; or where the constitution of the Arbitral 
Tribunal was not in accordance with arbitration agreement; and, 
or where the court finds the subject matter of the arbitral dispute 
was incapable of settlement by arbitration or the arbitral award is 
in conflict with the public policy of India. [Para 26]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – s.37 – Appellate 
Court – Jurisdiction u/s.37:
Held: The jurisdiction of the court u/s.37 of the Act is akin to 
the jurisdiction of the court u/s.34 of the Act, and, therefore, the 
scope of interference by the court in appeal u/s.37 cannot go 
beyond the grounds on which challenge can be made to the 
award u/s.34 of the Act – Moreover, the courts exercising powers 
u/ss.34 and 37, do not act as a normal court, and therefore, ought 
not to interfere with the arbitral award on a mere possibility of 
an alternative view – In other words, the scope of interference 
of the court with the arbitral matters is virtually prohibited, if not 
absolutely barred – The powers of the Appellate Court are even 
more restricted than the powers conferred by s.34 of the Act – The 
appellate power u/s.37 of the Act is exercisable only to find out 
if the court exercising power u/s.34 of the Act, has acted within 
its limits as prescribed thereunder or has exceeded or failed to 
exercise the power so conferred – The Appellate Court exercising 
powers u/s.37 of the Act has no authority of law to consider the 
matter in dispute before the Arbitral Tribunal on merits so as to 
hold as to whether the award of the Arbitral Tribunal is right or 
wrong – The Appellate Court in exercise of such power cannot 
sit as an ordinary court of appeal and reappraise the evidence to 
record a contrary finding – The award of the Arbitral Tribunal cannot 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
89
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
be touched by the court unless it is contrary to the substantive 
provision of law or any provision of the Act or the terms of the 
agreement. [Paras 36, 37]
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 – Purpose of the Act – 
Minimum intervention of the Court:
Held: The Act is a special enactment which aims to resolve 
contractual/commercial disputes through arbitration with the 
minimum intervention of the court, if not without the intervention 
of the court – In the event, the courts are allowed to step in at 
every stage and the arbitral awards are subjected to challenge 
before the courts in hierarchy before court of first instance, through 
regular appeals and finally by means of SLP/Civil Appeal before 
the Supreme Court, it would obviate/frustrate and defeat the very 
purpose of the Act – It is therefore, necessary to accept the arbitral 
award if it is not patently illegal or does not fall within the scope 
of intervention u/s.34 of the Act – The appeal thereof has a much 
narrower scope of intervention particularly when the arbitral award 
has been upheld u/s.34 of the Act – The appellate jurisdiction 
acquires little significance only when the arbitral award has been 
erroneously upheld or set aside by the court in exercise of its power 
u/s.34 of the Act as discussed earlier, but has no authority of law 
to consider the matter which was before the Arbitral Tribunal on 
merits. [Para 51]
Case Law Cited
MMTC Limited v. Vedanta Limited [2019] 3 SCR 1023 : (2019) 4 
SCC 163; Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd. v. Chenab Bridge Project 
[2023] 11 SCR 215 : (2023) 9 SCC 85; Punjab State Civil Supplies 
Corpn. Ltd. v. Sanman Rice Mills, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2632; 
UHL Power Company Limited v. State of Himachal Pradesh [2022] 
1 SCR 1 : (2022) 4 SCC 116; National Highways Authority of 
India v. M/s Hindustan Construction Company Ltd., 2024 INSC 
388 – relied on.
Bombay Slum Redevelopment Corporation Private Limited v. 
Samir Narain Bhojwani [2024] 7 SCR 136 : (2024) 7 SCC 218; 
Ssangyong Engineering and Construction Company Limited v. 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) [2019] 7 SCR 522 : 
(2019) 15 SCC 131; Larsen Air Conditioning and Refrigeration 
Company v. Union of India & Ors. [2023] 11 SCR 86 : (2023) 15 
SCC 472 – referred to.

90
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
List of Acts
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, Major Port Trust Act, 1963.
List of Keywords
Section 34 of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Section 37 
of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996; Mininum intervention of 
Court; Non-payment of dues; Under-payment of dues; Backhoe 
Dredger; Interpretation by Arbitral Tribunal; Patent Illegality; Public 
Policy of India; Idling Charges; Plausible View; Deference; Merits 
of the Case; Re-appreciation of Evidence.
Case Arising From
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 98 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 15.03.2021 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Madras in OSA No. 101 of 2020
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Chander U. Singh, Sr. Adv., Ms. Surekha Raman, Amarjit Singh 
Bedi, Shreyash Kumar, Yashwant Sanjenbam, M/S. K J John 
And Co.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
S. Nagamuthu, Sr. Adv., Mohan Raj A, Ms. Charulata Chaudhary.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Pankaj Mithal, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The appellant-Jan De Nul Dredging India Private Limited1 is a 
company registered under the Indian Companies Act, 1956 with an 
expertise in executing complex dredging operations.
1	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘appellant-Dredging India’

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
91
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
3.	
The respondent-Tuticorin Port Trust2 is a statutory authority constituted 
under the Major Port Trust Act, 1963. It undertook a major dredging 
project titled “Deepening of the Channel and Basin to Cater to 12.80 
meter Draught Vessels at Tuticorin Port”. In context with the above 
project to enhance the navigational depth of the port to accommodate 
larger sea vessels, the Port Trust on 15.07.2009 issued Notice 
Inviting Tender3.
4.	
The appellant-Dredging India was one of the bidders. After the 
evaluation of the bids, the contract was awarded to it. A formal 
work order was issued to it on 28.10.2010. Consequently, a License 
Agreement incorporating the tender conditions was formally executed 
between the parties on 27.12.2010 which involved the monetary 
value of Rs.465,47,56,517/- (Rupees Four Hundred Sixty Five Crore 
Forty Seven Lakhs Fifty Six Thousand Five Hundred and Seventeen 
only). It was stipulated that the work would be completed within 14 
months from the commencement i.e. by 28.06.2012.
5.	
The equipment to be deployed for the execution of the project 
under the License Agreement included one Cutter Suction Dredger 
(CSD) with a cutter power of 3,000 HP or more, three Self-Propelled 
Barges with hopper capacity of 16,000 cubic meters each, Floating/
Submersible Pipelines of 800-900 mm diameter and one Backhoe 
Dredger (BHD) Jerommeke with a bucket capacity of 3 to 4 cubic 
meters along with supporting and survey vessels.
6.	
Clause ‘C’ of the tender conditions which was part of the NIT 
stipulated as under :-
“(C) Plant and Equipment – Dredgers and ancillary 
equipments:
The intending Tenderers should own or hire suitable plant 
and equipment if it is on hiring, proof of availability of the 
plant and equipment on lease/charter for the entire duration 
of the work at short notice specifically for this project shall 
also be attached. It will be incumbent on the intending 
Tenderers to describe fully the equipment and plant which 
they propose to utilize for completing the work within the 
2	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘respondent-Port Trust’
3	
In short ‘NIT’

92
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
prescribed period. The choice of technology and plant 
and equipment proposed to be deployed will be left to the 
choice of the intending tenderers, subject to satisfying the 
Port Trust and the adequacy of the proposed technology 
and plant and equipment.
The Port Trust has assessed and average daily output 
of 12000 cubic meters for the scenario of deployment of 
Heavy Duty CSD to complete the work within the specified 
period of Fourteen Months for which the following indicative 
plant & equipment could be required.
1. Cutter Suction Dredger having cutter power 3000 HP 
or more -1 No.
2. Self-propelled barges having hopper capacity 1600 
Cubic Meters - 3 Nos.
3. Sufficient length of Floating/Submersible Pipe lines 
with and without ball joints 800 mm to 900 mm diameter.
4. Backhoe Dredger having bucket capacity 3 to 4 Cubic 
Meters - 1 No.
5. Supporting vessels
6. Survey Vessels etc.,
The tender document is open to firms/ companies/voluntary 
formed Joint Ventures/ Consortia meeting all the Minimum 
Eligibility Criteria as stipulated herein above.”
7.	
In view of the above clause, it was open for the appellant-Dredging 
India to deploy such equipment as may be necessary for the dredging 
purposes including major/minor dredgers. It was also free to deploy as 
many dredgers as may be felt necessary by it, subject to satisfaction 
of the respondent-Port Trust. It included one Backhoe Dredger (BHD) 
having bucket capacity of 3 to 4 cubic meter.
8.	
The appellant-Dredging India commenced operations under the 
aforesaid project on 28.12.2010. It deployed sufficient equipment 
more than what was agreed upon in the License Agreement, including 
two major Cutter Suction Dredger (CSD) as well as a Backhoe 
Dredger (BHD). The dredging work of the project was completed 
much ahead of schedule on 30.08.2011 i.e. eight months before 
the stipulated deadline.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
93
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
9.	
Upon the completion of the work, a joint survey was conducted by 
the respondent-Port Trust and the National Institute of Oceanography, 
Goa. The work was found to have been completed satisfactorily. 
Accordingly, the port was commissioned at a new depth on 19.11.2011. 
A Completion Certificate/Taking Over Certificate was issued to the 
appellant-Dredging India on 02.04.2012, much before the deadline 
of 28.06.2012, for the completion of the work.
10.	 The appellant-Dredging India submitted a final bill on 29.05.2012 
but it was not settled in full. Consequently, disputes arose between 
the parties relating to alleged non-payment and under-payment of 
dues as raised under the final bill. 
11.	 In the above scenario, the appellant-Dredging India was left with no 
option but to invoke the arbitration clause as contained in the License 
Agreement. The dispute was referred on 20.09.2012 to an Arbitral 
Tribunal consisting of three members. The appellant-Dredging India 
raised as many as eleven claims, one of which was Claim No.7 
regarding idle time due to respondent-Port Trust’s failure to provide 
possession of and access to site. 
12.	 The Arbitral Tribunal dealt with all the eleven claims and with the 
agreement of the parties decided Claim Nos.5, 6 and 7 together. 
The Arbitral Tribunal vide its award dated 18.10.2014 inter alia 
awarded an amount of Rs.14,66,04,216/-(Rupees Fourteen Crore 
Sixty Six Lakh Four Thousand Two Hundred and Sixteen only) to 
the appellant-Dredging India in respect of Claim No.7 i.e. regarding 
idling charges of Backhoe Dredger (BHD).
13.	 The aforesaid arbitral award was challenged by the respondent- Port 
Trust before the Learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court 
under Section 34 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 19964, by 
means of O.P. No.152/2015. Though, the respondent-Port Trust 
assailed the amounts awarded under Claim Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 
and 10 but at the time of hearing restricted its challenge only to the 
amount awarded under Claim No.7 with regard to idling charges for 
Backhoe Dredger (BHD).
14.	 The respondent-Port Trust contended before the Learned Single 
Judge of the High Court that under Clause 38 of the License 
4	
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’

94
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Agreement, the idle time charges were to be paid only in respect of 
idling of the major dredgers and that Backhoe Dredger (BHD) did 
not fall in that category. The Tribunal as such was not justified in 
accepting any claim in respect of idling of the Backhoe Dredger (BHD). 
15.	 The Learned Single Judge of the High Court on 10.09.2019 dismissed 
the petition filed under Section 34 of the Act upholding the findings 
of the Arbitral Tribunal and that Clause 38 of the License Agreement 
did not confine the payment of idle time compensation in respect of 
major dredgers only inasmuch as under Clause 51 of the License 
Agreement, it was open for the appellant-Dredging India to deploy 
dredgers without specifying whether major or minor dredgers. The 
Learned Single Judge further noted that the Tribunal had adequately 
considered the material on record and had interpreted the relevant 
clauses in the proper perspective and as such, there was no occasion 
for him to interfere with the award in exercise of limited jurisdiction 
under Section 34 of the Act.
16.	 Even after the award of the Arbitral Tribunal was upheld by the Learned 
Single Judge of the High Court, the respondent-Port Trust was not 
satisfied. It went in appeal under Section 37 of the Act before the 
Division Bench of the High Court by means of OSA No.101/2020. 
The appeal was restricted to the claim made and awarded under 
Claim No.7. 
17.	 It was argued that idle time compensation applicable in respect of 
major dredgers, could not have been awarded in respect of a minor 
dredger i.e. Backhoe Dredger (BHD). It was also contended that the 
Arbitral Tribunal had erroneously awarded idle time charges for a 
non-major dredger. The Backhoe Dredger (BHD) was not a major 
dredger therefore no idle time compensation could have been claimed 
or awarded if it had remained idle for any reason.
18.	 The Division Bench of the High Court vide judgment and order dated 
15.03.2021 allowed the appeal of the respondent-Port Trust and 
directed for the deletion of the claim awarded by the Arbitral Tribunal 
as upheld by the Learned Single Judge of the High Court in respect 
of Claim No.7 i.e. idle charges for the Backhoe Dredger (BHD). 
19.	 The aforesaid judgment and order of the Division Bench, passed in 
exercise of powers under Section 37 of the Act, has been assailed 
by the appellant-Dredging India in this appeal.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
95
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
20.	 Shri Chander U. Singh, learned senior counsel for the appellant-
Dredging India, at the threshold argued that the scope of Section 
37 of the Act is very limited and cannot extend beyond the ambit of 
Section 34 of the Act. Therefore, the Division Bench of the High Court 
manifestly erred in law in disturbing the judgment and order of the 
Learned Single Judge of the High Court upholding the arbitral award. 
Since the arbitral award had interpreted the various clauses of the 
License Agreement and had recorded a definite finding thereon in 
passing the award and as it was found that there was no scope for 
interference with it under Section 34 of the Act, the Appellate Court 
ought not to have varied or reversed the same. The interpretation 
of the clauses of the License Agreement, as made by the Arbitral 
Tribunal had to be accepted and that the appellate court had no 
jurisdiction to interpret those clauses in a different manner.
21.	 In defence, Shri S. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel for the 
respondent-Port Trust, argued that the Division Bench had rightly 
set aside the arbitral award in respect of Claim No.7 as the claim 
of the appellant-Dredging India for the delay in handing over the 
site was under Clauses 41.1 and 41.2 of the License Agreement 
and, therefore, the Tribunal could not have awarded compensation 
under Clause 51.1 which deals with the interruption of work due to 
port traffic etc. Secondly, the Arbitral Tribunal could not have relied 
upon Claim Nos.5 and 6 which were based on delays due to traffic 
in and outside port channel to award any compensation under Claim 
No.7 which was independent and the delay was not on account 
of port traffic. The award of the claim by the Arbitral Tribunal for 
Claim No.7 was patently illegal. The claim for compensation due to 
idling of the Backhoe Dredger (BHD) which was admittedly a minor 
dredger, was not covered under Clause 38 which only provided for 
the compensation for the idling of the major dredgers. 
22.	 Apart from other things, the broad question which falls for our 
consideration is whether the Division Bench in exercise of powers 
under Section 37 of the Act was justified to interfere with the judgment 
and order of the Learned Single Judge passed under Section 34 of 
the Act upholding the award of the Arbitral Tribunal. 
23.	 The ancillary issues which may arise are: whether the Backhoe 
Dredger (BHD) can be categorized as a minor dredger or is a major 
dredger; or whether deployment of a minor dredger was not stipulated 

96
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
under the License Agreement; and whether on the conjoint reading 
of Clauses 38, 41.1, 41.2 and 51.1, the appellant-Dredging India 
is entitled to any compensation for the idling of the said Backhoe 
Dredger (BHD).
24.	 The primary object of the Act is to provide speedy and inexpensive 
mode of resolution of disputes through the process of arbitration 
with the minimum intervention of the law courts. In this context, it 
would be beneficial to refer and quote Section 5 of the Act which 
reads as under:-
“5. Extent of judicial intervention-Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority 
shall intervene except where so provided in this Part.”
25.	 The above Section 5 of the Act contemplates that in matters of 
arbitration governed by Part-I i.e. in relation to domestic arbitration, 
minimum intervention of the judicial authority is acceptable unless 
it is otherwise provided under Part-I of the Act. In other words, in 
order to speed up the remedial measures under the Act in relation 
to domestic arbitration, there has to be minimum intervention of the 
court and, if necessary, it has to be only in strict compliance with 
the provisions of the Act.
26.	 The Act provides for the challenge of the arbitral award before the 
court on limited grounds as contemplated by Section 34 of the Act 
i.e. where one of the party was under some incapacity; or where 
the arbitration agreement itself was not valid; or the parties were 
not given proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or the 
arbitral proceedings; or was unable, for some reason, to present 
his case before the Arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal; or if the arbitral 
award deals with the dispute not contemplated or falling within the 
terms of the arbitration or deals with the matters beyond the scope 
of the arbitration; or where the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal 
was not in accordance with arbitration agreement; and, or where the 
court finds the subject matter of the arbitral dispute was incapable 
of settlement by arbitration or the arbitral award is in conflict with 
the public policy of India. 
27.	 In short, apart from the above grounds, the arbitral award is not 
open for challenge under Section 34 of the Act on any other ground. 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
97
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
So, the intervention of the court is limited. Therefore, technicalities 
apart, the main ground for challenge of the arbitral award in the 
instant case, which survives is that of the award being in conflict 
with the public policy of India i.e. whether it is in contravention with 
the fundamental policy of India or is in conflict with the most basic 
notions of morality or justice.
28.	 In the case at hand, a challenge to the award of the Arbitral Tribunal 
before the Learned Single Judge of the High Court would reveal 
that it was confined to Claim No.7 and that too on the merits of the 
same and not on the ground of violation of the public policy of India 
or that it is against the basic notions of morality or justice.
29.	 The Arbitral Tribunal, in making the award, has interpreted the 
various clauses of the License Agreement so as to hold that the 
appellant-Dredging India is entitled for appropriate compensation 
with regard to idling of its Backhoe Dredger (BHD) for want of non-
supply of site within time. Apparently, the challenge to the award of 
the Arbitral Tribunal was neither on any of the grounds enumerated 
under Section 34, nor even on the ground that the award of the 
Claim No.7 is against the fundamental policy of India or the basic 
notions of morality or justice. 
30.	 That being the position, the award of the Arbitral Tribunal was not 
liable to be disturbed under Section 34 of the Act and was rightly not 
disturbed. It is settled in law that the appellate powers under Section 
37 are limited to the scope of Section 34 and cannot exceed beyond 
it. Certainly, therefore, if an award is not liable to be disturbed under 
Section 34 of the Act, the same could not have been interfered with 
in exercise of powers under Section 37 of the Act.
31.	 In MMTC Limited vs. Vedanta Limited5, this Court has very 
succinctly laid down the powers of Appellate Court under the Act. 
It held as under :-
“14. As far as interference with an order made under 
Section 34, as per Section 37, is concerned, it cannot be 
disputed that such interference under Section 37 cannot 
travel beyond the restrictions laid down under Section 34. 
In other words, the court cannot undertake an independent 
5	
(2019) 4 SCC 163

98
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
assessment of the merits of the award, and must only 
ascertain that the exercise of power by the court under 
Section 34 has not exceeded the scope of the provision. 
Thus, it is evident that in case an arbitral award has been 
confirmed by the court under Section 34 and by the court in 
an appeal under Section 37, this Court must be extremely 
cautious and slow to disturb such concurrent findings.”
32.	 In Konkan Railway Corpn. Ltd. v. Chenab Bridge Project6, a 
three-judge bench of this Hon’ble Court has extensively dealt with 
the jurisprudence around Sections 34 and 37 of the Arbitration Act. 
This Court has held that: 
“18. At the outset, we may state that the jurisdiction of the 
court under Section 37 of the Act, as clarified by this Court 
in MMTC Ltd. v. Vedanta Ltd.7, is akin to the jurisdiction of 
the court under Section 34 of the Act. Scope of interference 
by a court in an appeal under Section 37 of the Act, in 
examining an order, setting aside or refusing to set aside 
an award, is restricted and subject to the same grounds 
as the challenge under Section 34 of the Act.
19. Therefore, the scope of jurisdiction under Section 34 
and Section 37 of the Act is not akin to normal appellate 
jurisdiction. It is well-settled that courts ought not to interfere 
with the arbitral award in a casual and cavalier manner. 
The mere possibility of an alternative view on facts or 
interpretation of the contract does not entitle courts to 
reverse the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal.”
33.	 In Punjab State Civil Supplies Corpn. Ltd. v. Sanman Rice Mills8, 
this Hon’ble Court, while examining the scope of Section 34 and 
Section 37 of the Arbitration Act, has held that:
“20. In view of the above position in law on the subject, 
the scope of the intervention of the court in arbitral matters 
is virtually prohibited, if not absolutely barred and that the 
interference is confined only to the extent envisaged under 
6	
(2023) 9 SCC 85
7	
(2019) 4 SCC 163
8	
2024 SCC OnLine SC 2632

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
99
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
Section 34 of the Act. The appellate power of Section 37 
of the Act is limited within the domain of Section 34 of the 
Act. It is exercisable only to find out if the court, exercising 
power under Section 34 of the Act, has acted within its 
limits as prescribed thereunder or has exceeded or failed 
to exercise the power so conferred. The Appellate Court 
has no authority of law to consider the matter in dispute 
before the arbitral tribunal on merits so as to find out as 
to whether the decision of the arbitral tribunal is right or 
wrong upon reappraisal of evidence as if it is sitting in 
an ordinary court of appeal. It is only where the court 
exercising power under Section 34 has failed to exercise 
its jurisdiction vested in it by Section 34 or has travelled 
beyond its jurisdiction that the appellate court can step in 
and set aside the order passed under Section 34 of the 
Act. Its power is more akin to that superintendence as is 
vested in civil courts while exercising revisionary powers. 
The arbitral award is not liable to be interfered unless a 
case for interference as set out in the earlier part of the 
decision, is made out. It cannot be disturbed only for 
the reason that instead of the view taken by the arbitral 
tribunal, the other view which is also a possible view is a 
better view according to the appellate court.
21. It must also be remembered that proceedings under 
Section 34 of the Act are summary in nature and are not 
like a full-fledged regular civil suit. Therefore, the scope 
of Section 37 of the Act is much more summary in nature 
and not like an ordinary civil appeal. The award as such 
cannot be touched unless it is contrary to the substantive 
provision of law; any provision of the Act or the terms of 
the agreement.”
34.	 In UHL Power Company Limited vs. State of Himachal Pradesh9, 
a three judges Bench of this Court observed as under:-
“The jurisdiction conferred on the courts under Section 
34 of the Arbitration Act is fairly narrow, when it comes to 
the scope of an appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration 
9	
(2022) 4 SCC 116

100
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Act, the jurisdiction of the Appellate Court in examining 
an order, setting aside or refusing to set aside an order, 
is all the more circumscribed.”
35.	 In a recent case of Bombay Slum Redevelopment Corporation 
Private Limited vs. Samir Narain Bhojwani10, a Bench of this 
Court, of which one of us (P. Mithal, J.) was a member, had held 
that the jurisdiction of the Appellate Court dealing with an appeal 
under Section 37 of the Act against the judgment in a petition under 
Section 34 of the Act is more constrained than the jurisdiction of the 
court dealing with a petition under Section 34 of the Act.
36.	 The gist of the aforesaid decisions is that the jurisdiction of the court 
under Section 37 of the Act is akin to the jurisdiction of the court under 
Section 34 of the Act, and, therefore, the scope of interference by the 
court in appeal under Section 37 cannot go beyond the grounds on 
which challenge can be made to the award under Section 34 of the 
Act. Moreover, the courts exercising powers under Sections 34 and 
37, do not act as a normal court, and therefore, ought not to interfere 
with the arbitral award on a mere possibility of an alternative view.
37.	 In other words, the scope of interference of the court with the arbitral 
matters is virtually prohibited, if not absolutely barred. The powers 
of the Appellate Court are even more restricted than the powers 
conferred by Section 34 of the Act. The appellate power under Section 
37 of the Act is exercisable only to find out if the court exercising 
power under Section 34 of the Act, has acted within its limits as 
prescribed thereunder or has exceeded or failed to exercise the 
power so conferred. The Appellate Court exercising powers under 
Section 37 of the Act has no authority of law to consider the matter 
in dispute before the Arbitral Tribunal on merits so as to hold as 
to whether the award of the Arbitral Tribunal is right or wrong. The 
Appellate Court in exercise of such power cannot sit as an ordinary 
court of appeal and reappraise the evidence to record a contrary 
finding. The award of the Arbitral Tribunal cannot be touched by the 
court unless it is contrary to the substantive provision of law or any 
provision of the Act or the terms of the agreement.
38.	 Undoubtedly, in the case at hand, the award of the Arbitral Tribunal 
is not contrary to any substantive provision of law or any provision of 
10	
(2024) 7 SCC 218

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
101
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
the Act. Yet, it has been disturbed by the Appellate Court, apparently 
by giving a different interpretation of the clauses of the License 
Agreement which jurisdiction was not vested in it. Ordinarily, the 
interpretation given by the Arbitral Tribunal, as affirmed by the court 
in exercise of powers under Section 34 of the Act ought to have 
been accepted.
39.	 In regard to the contention that the arbitral award was contrary to 
the terms of the Licence Agreement, it would be trite to state that 
due and proper interpretation of the various clauses of the Licence 
Agreement was given by the Arbitral Tribunal and the same also had 
the approval of the Learned Single Judge by his judgment passed 
in exercise of powers under Section 34 of the Act and as such the 
Appellate Court could not have given a different interpretation to 
the said clauses. The Appellate Court was actually bound by the 
interpretation of the clauses of the Licence Agreement as given by 
the Arbitral Tribunal and accepted by the Court under Section 34.
40.	 In National Highways Authority of India v. M/s Hindustan 
Construction Company Ltd.11 a Bench of this Court, speaking 
through Justice Oka, of which one of us (Shri P. Mithal, J.) was also 
a member held as under:
“There cannot be any dispute that as far as the construction 
of the terms of a contract is concerned, it is for the Arbitral 
Tribunal to adjudicate upon. If, after considering the material 
on record, the Arbitral Tribunal takes a particular view on 
the interpretation of the contract, the Court under Section 
34 does not sit in appeal over the findings of the arbitrator.”
In view of the aforesaid decision, if the interpretation given by the 
Arbitral Tribunal cannot be disturbed under Section 34 of the Act, the 
same cannot also be disturbed by exercising powers under Section 
37 of the Act.
41.	 Shri S. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel for the respondent-
Port Trust, had cited Ssangyong Engineering and Construction 
Company Limited vs. National Highways Authority of India 
(NHAI)12, to contend that when there is patent illegality in the award, 
11	
2024 INSC 388
12	
(2019) 15 SCC 131

102
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the same could always be corrected in appeal under Section 37 
of the Act. A close reading of the above decision would reveal 
that in order to apply the same, first, it has to be established that 
there is a patent illegality on the face of the award; secondly, mere 
contravention of substantive laws of India by itself is no longer 
a ground available to set aside the award; and if the Arbitrator 
gives no reason for an award, it would amount to patent illegality. 
In the present case, no patent illegality on the face of the award 
stands established. The Arbitral Award is a speaking award with 
findings and interpretations based upon reasons. Moreover, there 
is apparently no violation of the fundamental policy of any Indian 
law or the basic notions of morality and justice to enable the courts 
to interfere with the award.
42.	 Insofar as the merits of the case or other ancillary points arising in the 
matter as referred to above, it would be relevant to refer to Clauses 
38, 41.1, 41.2 as well as Clause 51.1 of the License Agreement. 
The aforesaid clauses are being reproduced hereinbelow for the 
sake of convenience :-
“Clause 38- STOPPAGE OF WORKS
The Contractor may be instructed to stop the works from 
time to time due to security reasons, moving ships, or any 
other reasons as per the instructions of the Port Authorities.
The Contractor shall furnish idle time charges for the major 
dredgers proposed to be deployed by him in the BOQ. The 
rate for idle time charges, quoted by the lowest Bidder, 
will be finalized taking into account the lowest idle time 
charges quoted by the other Bidders.
Clause 41.1- POSSESSION OF SITE AND ACCESS 
THERETO
Save in so far as the Contract may prescribe:
a) the extent of portions of the Site of which the Contractor 
is to be given possession from time to time and
b) the order in which the Works shall be executed as may 
be mutually agreed on and as per the programme,
c) so much of the Site, and

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
103
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
d) such access as, in accordance with the Contract, is to be 
provided by the Employer as may be required to enable the 
Contractor to commence and proceed with the execution 
of the Works in accordance with the programme referred 
to in Clause 44.1, if any, and otherwise in accordance 
with such reasonable proposals as the Contractor shall, 
by notice to the Engineer. The Engineer will, from time 
to time as the Work proceeds, give to the Contractor 
possession of such further portions of the Site as may 
be required to enable the Contractor to proceed with the 
execution of the Works with due dispatch in accordance 
with such programme or proposals, as the case may be.
Clause 41.2- FAILURE TO GIVE POSSESSION
If the Contractor suffers delay and/or incurs costs from 
failure on the part of the Employer to give possession 
in accordance with the terms of Sub-Clause 41.1, the 
Engineer shall, after due consultation with the Employer 
and Contractor, determine any extension of time to which 
the Contractor is entitled under Clause 43.1, and the 
amount of such costs which shall be added to the Contract 
Price and shall notify the Contractor accordingly.
Clause 51.1- INTERRUPTIONS TO WORK
The Contractor shall allow in his rates for any loss of 
working time due to weather, surveying, positioning of 
craft, shifting of dredger/equipment during maintenance. 
Idle time of the dredger/equipment exceeding a continuous 
period of 4 (four) hours due to interruption caused by Port 
traffic, berthing, unberthing, or shifting of vessels and other 
operations in the Harbour basin and Approach Channel, 
excluding the specified times under Sub-Clause 6.0 Section 
III shipping operations (i.e., from 07.00 hours to 14.00 
hours) as instructed/agreed by the Engineer, shall be paid 
for at the quoted rates included in the Bill of Quantities, 
subject to the Engineer being notified by the Contractor 
within 12 hours on each occasion of such interruptions. 
The idle time for such payment shall be reckoned as the 
total time in one continuous interruption minus 2 hours. 

104
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Berthing programme of vessels will be provided every day 
after berthing meeting at 12.00 hours or when ETAs are 
made available to Port by shipping agencies.
Notice will be given approximately 1 hour before the sailing 
of vessels, and the Contractor shall contact the Port Marine 
Department for any information in this regard. No claim 
whatsoever for additional payments on account of the 
specified interruption will be entertained.”
43.	 The aforesaid Clause 38 though speaks about stoppage of work 
and about idle time charges for the major dredger deployed by the 
contractor i.e. the appellant-Dredging India, but it nowhere prohibits 
the appellant-Dredging India to claim compensation in respect of 
any other equipment including Backhoe Dredger, if it remains idle. 
The aforesaid Clause 38 cannot be read so as to mean that since 
it provides for idle time charges for major dredgers, compensation 
in respect of other equipment or minor/special dredgers is not 
permissible.
44.	 Clauses 41.1 and 41.2 provide for the consequences of failure on 
part of the respondent-Port Trust to give possession of the site in 
time including extension of time and costs. However, this does not 
ipso facto mean that idle time compensation would not be admissible 
if the site is not made available for any other reason covered under 
the terms of the License Agreement.
45.	 The aforesaid Clauses 41.1 and 41.2 cannot be read in isolation. If 
we read the aforesaid clauses of the Licence Agreement conjointly 
with Clause 51.1, it would be evident that idle time charges or 
compensation are available even if any equipment is kept idle on 
account of delay or non-providing of the site for operation within time. 
In view of Clause 51.1, the argument that since the Claim No. 7 was 
virtually under Clauses 41.1 and 41.2, the Arbitral Tribunal could not 
have awarded claim under Clause 51.1 is misconceived, inasmuch 
as it is settled in law that if the power to grant a relief is available 
under the Act or the terms and conditions of the Licence Agreement, 
it is immaterial as to under which clause the same is claimed.
46.	 In the instant case, the power to award compensation for idle time of 
the equipment including Backhoe Dredger is traceable to Clause 51.1 
of the Lease Agreement and therefore the Arbitral Tribunal was not 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
105
Jan De Nul Dredging India Pvt. Ltd. v. Tuticorin Port Trust
wrong in interpreting the clauses so as to make an award in favour of 
the appellant-Dredging India under Claim No. 7. In such a situation, 
the interpretation given by the Arbitral Tribunal is apparently a plausible 
view and was rightly not disturbed by the Learned Single Judge in 
exercise of power under Section 34 of the Act. Therefore, in appeal 
under Section 37 of the Act, the said reasoning could not have been 
disturbed so as to permit a different view. The interpretation given 
by the Arbitral Tribunal had to be accepted by the Appellate Court.
47.	 In paragraph 15 of Larsen Air Conditioning and Refrigeration 
Company vs. Union of India & Ors.13, this Court observed that the 
limited and extremely circumscribed jurisdiction of the court under 
Section 34 of the Act, permits the court to interfere with an award, 
sans the grounds of patent illegality but if an arbitrator construes a 
term of a contract in a reasonable manner, it will not mean that the 
award can be set aside on that ground. 
48.	 In the case at hand, the Arbitral Award contains logical reasons 
in construing the various clauses of the License Agreement and 
the view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal had been accepted by the 
court under Section 34 of the Act as a reasonable and a possible 
view. Therefore, in the light of above referred decision of Larsen 
Air Conditioning (supra), the Arbitral Award could not have been 
set aside even if there was a possible second view regarding the 
interpretation of the clauses of the License Agreement.
49.	 In the light of the above discussion, the ancillary issues, whether 
the Backhoe Dredger (BHD) is a minor or a major dredger or 
whether it could have been deployed for the project work, pales 
into insignificance. The License Agreement permits deployment of 
Backhoe Dredger (BHD) without specifying whether it is a minor or 
a major dredger. Moreover, as discussed earlier, it was open for 
the appellant-Dredging India to deploy the equipment as may be 
felt necessary by it, and, therefore, the deployment of the Backhoe 
Dredger (BHD) was not contrary to any terms of the License 
Agreement.
50.	 In view of the aforesaid factual and legal position, we are of the 
opinion that the Appellate Court manifestly erred in law in interfering 
13	
(2023) 15 SCC 472

106
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
with the judgment and order of the Learned Single Judge of the 
High Court passed under Section 34 of the Act so as to disturb the 
arbitral award in respect of Claim No.7.
51.	 Before parting, we consider it proper to note that the Act is a special 
enactment which aims to resolve contractual/commercial disputes 
through arbitration with the minimum intervention of the court, if 
not without the intervention of the court. In the event, the courts 
are allowed to step in at every stage and the arbitral awards are 
subjected to challenge before the courts in hierarchy before court of 
first instance, through regular appeals and finally by means of SLP/
Civil Appeal before the Supreme Court, it would obviate/frustrate 
and defeat the very purpose of the Act. It is therefore, necessary to 
accept the arbitral award if it is not patently illegal or does not fall 
within the scope of intervention under Section 34 of the Act. The 
appeal thereof has a much narrower scope of intervention particularly 
when the arbitral award has been upheld under Section 34 of the Act. 
The appellate jurisdiction acquires little significance only when the 
arbitral award has been erroneously upheld or set aside by the court 
in exercise of its power under Section 34 of the Act as discussed 
earlier, but has no authority of law to consider the matter which was 
before the Arbitral Tribunal on merits. 
52.	 In the light of the above discussion, in our opinion, the impugned 
judgment and order dated 15.03.2021 passed by the Division Bench 
of the High Court under Section 37 of the Act is unsustainable in 
law and is accordingly set aside. 
53.	 The appeal is allowed with no order as to costs. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Ankit Gyan
