[2026] 2 S.C.R. 128 : 2026 INSC 41
Roshni Devi
v.
The State of Telangana and Others
(Criminal Appeal No. 116 of 2026)
08 January 2026
[J.K. Maheshwari and Atul S. Chandurkar,* JJ.]
Issue for Consideration
Issue arose whether the order of preventive detention passed by the 
Magistrate and upheld by the High Court u/s.3(2) of the Telangana 
Prevention of Dangerous Activities Act, 1986 valid in law.
Headnotes†
Telangana Prevention of Dangerous Activities of Boot-
Leggers, Dacoits, Drug-Offenders, Goondas, Immoral Traffic 
Offenders, [Land-Grabbers, Spurious Seed Offenders, 
Insecticide Offenders, Fertiliser Offenders, Food Adulteration 
Offenders, Fake Document Offenders, Scheduled Commodities 
Offenders, Forest Offenders, Gaming Offenders, Sexual 
Offenders, Explosive Substances Offenders, Arms Offenders, 
Cyber Crime Offenders and White Collar or Financial 
Offenders] Act, 1986  – ss.2(a), 2(f), 3(2), 3(3) – Narcotics 
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 – s.8(c) r/w 
s.20(b)(ii) (b) – Preventive detention – Daughter of detenu 
challenged detention order  – Detention based on three 
criminal cases under NDPS Act alleging possession and 
peddling of ganja, and was found to be “drug offender” – 
Apprehension recorded that if released on bail she would 
continue illegal activities – Detention order upheld by High 
Court – Correctness:
Held: Order of detention merely refers to three crimes registered 
against the detenu – If the Detaining Authority was of the view that 
the detenu had violated any conditions of bail, steps for cancellation 
of her liberty could have been taken – That was not done – Mere 
apprehension on the part of the detaining authority that in the event 
of the detenu being released on bail, she was likely to indulge in 
* Author

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
129
Roshni Devi v. The State of Telangana and Others
similar crimes that would be prejudicial to maintenance of public 
order would not be a sufficient ground to order her preventive 
detention – Order of detention does not indicate in what manner the 
maintenance of public order was either adversely affected or was 
likely to be adversely affected so as to detain the detenu – Mere 
reproduction of the expressions mentioned in s.2(a) in the order 
of detention would not be sufficient – There is a fine distinction 
between “law and order” and “public order” – Mere registration 
of three offences by itself would not have any bearing on the 
maintenance of public order unless there is material to show that 
the narcotic drug dealt with by the detenu was in fact dangerous to 
public health under the Act of 1986, which is missing in the order 
of detention – Order of detention unsustainable and is quashed 
and set aside. [Paras 7-11]
Case Law Cited
Rekha v. State of Tamil Nadu, 2011 INSC 267 : [2011] 4 SCR 
740; Pesala Nookaraju v. Government of Andhra Pradesh & Ors., 
2023 INSC 734 : [2023] 11 SCR 520; Ameena Begum v. the State 
of Telangana and Others, 2023 INSC 788 : [2023] 11 SCR 958; 
Vijay Narain Singh v. State of Bihar [1984] 3 SCR 435 : (1984) 3 
SCC 14 – referred to.
List of Acts
Telangana Prevention of Dangerous Activities of Boot Leggers, 
Dacoits, Drug-Offenders, Goondas, Immoral Traffic Offenders 
[Land-Grabbers, Spurious Seed Offenders, Insecticide Offenders, 
Fertiliser Offenders, Food Adulteration Offenders, Fake Document 
Offenders, Scheduled Commodities Offenders, Forest Offenders, 
Gaming Offenders, Sexual Offenders, Explosive Substances 
Offenders, Arms Offenders, Cyber Crime Offenders and White 
Collar or Financial Offenders] Act, 1986; Narcotics Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
List of Keywords
Preventive detention; Drug offender; Public order; Law and order; 
Subjective satisfaction; Extraneous considerations; Detaining 
authority; Bail; Judicial custody; Detention order; Possession and 
peddling of ganja; Illegal activities.

130
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Case Arising From
CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No. 
116 of 2026
From the Judgment and Order dated 28.10.2025 of the High Court 
for the State of Telangana at Hyderabad in WP No. 12443 of 2025
Appearances for Parties
Advs. for the Appellant(s):
Ravi Shankar Jandhyala, Sr. Adv., Kumar Abhishek, Sunny Kumar, 
Vikash Pandey, Satyam Parashar, Devi Venkata Srikar Pagadala.
Advs. for the Respondent(s):
Kumar Vaibhaw, Ms. Devina Sehgal, Dhananjay Yadav, Ishaan 
Ojha.
Judgment / Order of the Supreme Court
Judgment
Atul S. Chandurkar, J.
1.	
Leave granted.
2.	
The appellant who is the daughter of the detenu-Aruna Bai alias 
Anguri Bai is aggrieved by the order of detention dated 10.03.2025 
passed by the Collector and District Magistrate, Hyderabad under 
Section 3(2) of the Telangana Prevention of Dangerous Activities of 
Boot-Leggers, Dacoits, Drug-Offenders, Goondas, Immoral Traffic 
Offenders [Land-Grabbers, Spurious Seed Offenders, Insecticide 
Offenders, Fertiliser Offenders, Food Adulteration Offenders, 
Fake Document Offenders, Scheduled Commodities Offenders, 
Forest Offenders, Gaming Offenders, Sexual Offenders, Explosive 
Substances Offenders, Arms Offenders, Cyber Crime Offenders and 
White Collar or Financial Offenders] Act, 1986 (for short, the Act of 
1986). She approached the High Court of Telangana by preferring 
Writ Petition No.12443 of 2025 for challenging the aforesaid order. 
The Division Bench of the High Court however refused to interfere 
with the order of detention and dismissed the said writ petition on 
28.10.2025. Being aggrieved, the appellant has preferred the present 
appeal.

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
131
Roshni Devi v. The State of Telangana and Others
3.	
The grounds of detention as referred to in the order of detention 
dated 10.03.2025 indicate consideration of the criminal history of the 
detenu. There is reference to Crime No. 243/ 2024 dated 16.09.2024 
registered under Section 8 (c) read with Section 20 (b) (ii) (b) of 
the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 at the 
Prohibition and Excise Station Dhoolpet, District Hyderabad. There 
is also reference to Crime No.270/2024 dated 12.12.2024 registered 
against the detenu under similar provisions as in the first crime. The 
detenu came to be arrested on 12.12.2024 and while she was in 
judicial custody, Crime No.42/2024 under similar provisions came 
to be registered at the same Police Station on 17.12.2024. “Ganja” 
came to be seized from the detenu in this process. The detenu was 
found to be a “drug offender” under Section 2 (f) of the Act of 1986 
and by observing that ill-effects of Ganja were harmful and injurious 
public health, power conferred by Section 3 (2) of the Act of 1986 
came to be exercised. The Collector and District Magistrate was 
also of the view that the detenu had moved an application for grant 
of bail in Crime Nos. 243/2024 and 270/2024 which were pending. 
He apprehended that if the detenu succeeded in obtaining bail, 
she would continue to engage in illegal activities. The proceedings 
registered against her under the ordinary law had no deterrent effect 
and hence it was found necessary to detain her as a last resort in 
interest of public at large. On this basis, the order of detention came 
to be passed on 10.03.2025. Approval to the aforesaid order came 
to be granted under Section 3(3) of the Act of 1986 by the General 
Administration Department on 15.03.2025. Thereafter on 15.04.2025, 
the order of detention came to be confirmed.
4.	
The High Court was of the view that the repeated and well planned 
actions of the detenu were sufficient to raise the presumption of threat 
and alarm amongst the general public regarding their health which 
was the primary criteria for maintaining peace as well as law and 
order in society. It found that there was no reason to interfere with 
the subjective satisfaction record by the detaining authority and that 
the order of detention did not suffer from any irregularity warranting 
interference. On these findings the High Court declined to interfere 
with the order of detention.
5.	
Mr. Ravi Shankar Jandhyala, learned Senior Advocate for the 
appellant submitted that in absence of any material for recording 
satisfaction that the detenu had acted in a manner prejudicial to 

132
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
the maintenance of public order as required by Section 2 (a) of the 
Act of 1986, the detenu could not have been preventively detained. 
Merely because the detenu was found to be a “drug offender” under 
Section 2 (f) of the Act of 1986, there was no justification for passing 
the order of detention. The detenu had been enlarged on bail in 
Crime No.243 of 2024 and it could not be said that the conditions 
imposed while enlarging her were insufficient to prevent the detenu 
from committing any further offence. The order of detention was 
passed merely as an alternative to cancellation of bail. It was further 
submitted that merely by referring to the previous criminal history 
attributed to the detenu, the order of detention had been passed. 
In absence of any specific instance/s indicating the conduct of the 
detenu to be prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, there 
was no basis to direct her detention. Even if it was accepted that the 
detenu was involved in the offences as alleged, it could not be said 
that the same affected maintenance of public order. At the highest, 
the activities could be termed to be prejudicial to the maintenance 
of law and order. To substantiate the grounds as urged, reliance 
was placed on the decision in Rekha Vs. State of Tamil Nadu1. 
It was thus submitted that in absence of relevant material on the 
basis of which subjective satisfaction could have been recorded 
by the detaining authority indicating the acts of the detenu to be 
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, the order of detention 
was unsustainable. It was liable to be set aside.
6.	
Mr. Kumar Vaibhaw, learned counsel appearing for the respondents 
supported the order of detention. It was urged that the detenu was a 
drug offender within the meaning of Section 2 (f) of the Act of 1986. 
Considering her continuing involvement in dealing with Ganja which 
was evident from the crimes registered against her, the detaining 
authority was justified in coming to the conclusion that the detenu’s 
activities adversely affected the maintenance of public order. Her 
continued illegal acts indicated that the provisions of ordinary law 
were insufficient so as to deter her from continuing such illegal acts 
in dealing with narcotic drugs. Her continuous acts were therefore 
rightly found to be prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. The 
learned counsel referred to the affidavit dated 07.01.2026 filed on 
behalf of the Special Officer In-charge, Government of Telangana 
1	
2011 INSC 267

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
133
Roshni Devi v. The State of Telangana and Others
as well as the documents filed along with it. The learned counsel 
referred to the decision in Pesala Nookaraju Vs. Government of 
Andhra Pradesh & Ors.2 to urge that since the order of detention 
had been passed after recording subjective satisfaction that there 
was likelihood of breach of public order, no interference with the 
same was called for. It was thus submitted that the appeal was 
liable to be dismissed.
7.	
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and having perused 
the documentary material on record we are satisfied that the order 
of preventive detention is liable to be set aside. 
8.	
The order of detention merely refers to three crimes registered against 
the detenu on 16.09.2024, 12.12.2024 and 17.12.2024. It may be 
noted that pursuant to Crime No.270/2024 dated 12.12.2024, the 
detenu had been arrested and was in judicial custody when Crime 
No.42/2024 dated 17.12.2024 came to be registered. On the premise 
that if the detenu was released on bail she was likely to indulge in 
serious offences, the detaining authority proceeded to record that it 
was satisfied that cases registered against her under the ordinary 
law had no deterrent effect in preventing her prejudicial activities. 
Whether the conditions imposed while enlarging the detenu on bail 
in the earlier offences were insufficient to prevent her from indulging 
in similar offences has not been adverted to. It would be profitable to 
refer to the reason for detention as recorded by the Detaining Authority 
in the detention order. The relevant portion thereof reads as under:
“I am aware that you were arrested on 12-12-2024 in Crime 
No.270/2024 dated 12-12-2024 and 243/2024 dated 16-09-
2024 of Prohibition & Excise Station Dhoolpest and Crime 
No.42/2024 dated 17/12/2024 (produced before the Hon’ble 
Court through P.T. Warrant) of Excise Station Narayanguda 
Hyderabad and in Judicial Custody at Special Prison for 
Women Hyderabad at Chenchalguda. Subsequently, you 
have moved bail petition before the Hon’ble Sessions Court 
in Crime No. 243/2024 and 270/2024 vide Crl M.P. No. 
695/2025 and 696/2025 Dt 11-02-2025 and granted bail. 
You have also filed bail petition in Crime No. 42/2024 vide 
Crl. M.P. No. 370/2025 and is pending before the Hon’ble 
Sessions Judge for orders, hence still in judicial custody.
2	
2023 INSC 734

134
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
Considering entire material, including the bail petitions and 
the orders passed therein, I apprehend that if you succeed 
in obtaining bail and you being released on bail in due 
course, keeping in view that on the earlier occasions during 
the period 2016 to 2023, though you were released on 
bail, but did not mend your habitual nature of committing 
similar offences and again in the recent past during the 
year 2024 you have committed (3) more similar offences, 
I strongly believe though you are in judicial custody in 
Cr.No.42/2024 and your bail petition is pending, in case 
of being granted bail in the said case and after your 
release on bail you would again resort to similar unlawful 
activities of peddling of Ganja, and keeping in view your 
antecedents and considering the ill effects of Ganja on the 
public health and particularly youth and students and its 
impact on the society and having satisfied that the cases 
registered against you under the ordinary law have no 
deterrent effect in preventing your prejudicial activities, 
I strongly believe that you are not amenable to ordinary 
law, unless you are detained by an appropriate order of 
detention as a last resort, in the interest of public at large. 
It is imperative to prevent you from acting in any manner 
prejudicial to maintenance of Public Order, I feel that 
recourse to normal law would involve considerable time 
and may not be effective deterrent in preventing you from 
indulging in further activities prejudicial to maintenance of 
public order in and around Hyderabad District.”
From the aforesaid observations, it is clear that the Detaining 
Authority intended to detain the mother of the appellant at any cost. 
Her conduct during the period from 2016 to 2023 has been kept in 
mind. If the Detaining Authority was of the view that the detenu had 
violated any conditions of bail, steps for cancellation of her liberty 
could have been taken. That has not been done here. 
9.	
In this regard, we may refer to the decision of this Court in Ameena 
Begum Vs. the State of Telangana and Others3, wherein the effect 
of extraneous factors weighing in the mind of the Detaining Authority 
3	
2023 INSC 788

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
135
Roshni Devi v. The State of Telangana and Others
while passing an order of detention has been considered. Incidentally, 
the order of detention therein was also passed under the Act of 1986. 
It has been observed in paragraphs 49 to 52 as under: -
“……..At the same time, the detaining authority ought to 
ensure that the order does not manifest consideration 
of extraneous factors. The detaining authority must be 
cautious and circumspect that no extra or additional 
word or sentence finds place in the order of detention, 
which evinces the human factor - his mindset of either 
acting with personal predilection by invoking the stringent 
preventive detention laws to avoid or oust judicial scrutiny, 
given the restrictions of judicial review in such cases, or 
as an authority charged with the notion of overreaching 
the courts, chagrined and frustrated by orders granting 
bail to the detenu despite stiff opposition raised by the 
State and thereby failing in the attempt to keep the detenu 
behind bars.
50. What we have expressed above is best exemplified 
by the observations of the Commissioner in the Detention 
Order under challenge, which are considered appropriate 
to be quoted. Therein, the Commissioner inter alia stated 
as follows:
“The proposed detenu and his associate are 
notorious offenders and rowdy sheeters….
The proposed detenu was surrendered before the Hon’ble 
Court in Cr.No.35/2023 of Falaknuma PS and the Hon’ble 
Magistrate remanded him to judicial custody, he moved 
bail petitions in Cr.Nos. 18/2023 of Golconda PS and 
35/2023 of Falaknuma PS. The prosecution has filed 
suitable counters strongly opposing the grant of bail to 
him, but the Hon’ble Magistrate granted bail to him in both 
the cases and ordered for his release. Subsequently, he 
was released from judicial remand on bail.
As seen from his past criminal history, background and 
antecedents and also his habitual nature of committing 
crimes one after the other and his efforts to come out of 
the prison, I strongly believe that if such a habitual criminal 

136
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
is set free, his activities would not be safe to the society 
and there is an imminent possibility of his committing 
similar offences by violating the bail conditions in one of 
the cases, which would be detrimental to public order, 
unless he is preventively detained from doing so by an 
appropriate order of detention.”
With respect to the stage of proceedings in the offences 
which form its basis, the Detention Order states that despite 
being contested by the State, bail has been granted to the 
Detenu in Crimes No. 4 and 5. Insofar as grant of bail to 
the Detenu is concerned, the Commissioner states that:
“I strongly believe that if such a habitual criminal 
is set free his activities would not be safe to 
the society and there is an imminent possibility 
of his committing similar offences by violating 
the bail conditions in one of the cases, which 
would be detrimental to public order, unless he 
is preventively detained from doing so by an 
appropriate order of detention.”
51. We are of the opinion that the aforesaid excerpts from 
the Detention Order lay bare the Commissioner’s attempt 
to transgress his jurisdiction and to pass an order of 
detention, which cannot be construed as an order validly 
made under the Act. The quoted observations are reflective 
of the intention to detain the Detenu at any cost without 
resorting to due procedure. It is neither the case of the 
respondents that the Detenu had not complied with the 
terms of the notice issued under section 41-A of the Cr. 
PC, nor has it been alleged that the conditions of bail had 
been violated by the Detenu. It is pertinent to note that 
in the three criminal proceedings where the Detenu had 
been released on bail, no applications for cancellation of 
bail had been moved by the State. In the light of the same, 
the provisions of the Act, which is an extraordinary statute, 
should not have been resorted to when ordinary criminal law 
provided sufficient means to address the apprehensions 
leading to the impugned Detention Order. There may have 
existed sufficient grounds to appeal against the bail orders, 

[2026] 2 S.C.R. 
137
Roshni Devi v. The State of Telangana and Others
but the circumstances did not warrant the circumvention of 
ordinary criminal procedure to resort to an extraordinary 
measure of the law of preventive detention.
52. In Vijay Narain Singh Vs. State of Bihar4, Hon’ble 
E.S. Venkataramiah, J. (as the Chief Justice then was) 
observed:
32. ...It is well settled that the law of preventive 
detention is a hard law and therefore it should 
be strictly construed. Care should be taken that 
the liberty of a person is not jeopardised unless 
his case falls squarely within the four corners of 
the relevant law. The law of preventive detention 
should not be used merely to clip the wings 
of an accused who is involved in a criminal 
prosecution. It is not intended for the purpose 
of keeping a man under detention when under 
ordinary criminal law it may not be possible to 
resist the issue of orders of bail, unless the 
material available is such as would satisfy the 
requirements of the legal provisions authorising 
such detention. When a person is enlarged on 
bail by a competent criminal court, great caution 
should be exercised in scrutinising the validity of 
an order of preventive detention which is based 
on the very same charge which is to be tried 
by the criminal court.”
(underlining ours, for emphasis)”
Thus, mere apprehension on the part of the detaining authority that 
in the event of the detenu being released on bail, she was likely to 
indulge in similar crimes that would be prejudicial to maintenance of 
public order would not be a sufficient ground to order her preventive 
detention.
10.	 Section 3 (1) of the Act of 1986 enables the Government, if it is 
satisfied that a drug offender ought to be prevented from acting in 
4	
(1984) 3 SCC 14

138
[2026] 2 S.C.R.
Supreme Court Reports
any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order to make 
an order of preventive detention. The expression “acting in any 
manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order” has been 
defined by Section 2(a) of the Act 1986. As per the Explanation to 
the said provision, if any of the activities of the person concerned 
causes or is calculated to cause any harm, danger or alarm or a 
feeling of insecurity among the general public or a section thereof or 
in case of a grave widespread danger to life or public health is likely 
to be caused, such power can be exercised. The order of detention 
does not indicate in what manner the maintenance of public order 
was either adversely affected or was likely to be adversely affected 
so as to detain the detenu. Mere reproduction of the expressions 
mentioned in Section 2(a) of the Act of 1986 in the order of detention 
would not be sufficient. The detention order ought to indicate the 
recording of subjective satisfaction by the detaining authority in that 
regard. It is well settled that there is a fine distinction between “law 
and order” and “public order”. Mere registration of three offences by 
itself would not have any bearing on the maintenance of public order 
unless there is material to show that the narcotic drug dealt with by 
the detenu was in fact dangerous to public health under the Act of 
1986. This material is found to be missing in the order of detention.
11.	 For aforesaid reasons, we find that the order of detention dated 
10.03.2025 to be unsustainable. It is accordingly quashed and set 
aside. Consequently, the impugned judgment dated 28.10.2025 in 
Writ Petition No. 12443 of 2025 passed by the Division Bench of 
the High Court is also quashed. The detenu be released forthwith 
if not required in any other proceedings. The appeal is allowed in 
aforesaid terms leaving the parties to bear their own costs. 
Result of the case: Appeal allowed.
†Headnotes prepared by: Nidhi Jain
